                                            Submodular Multi-Agent Policy Learning for Online
                                             Distributed Task Allocation in Open Multi-Agent
                                                                 Systems

                                                                             Jing Liu1∗ Yangyang Yang1∗ Luca Ballotta2
                                                                              Fangfei Li1† Yang Tang3† Ruggero Carli2




arXiv:2605.13269v1 [eess.SY] 13 May 2026
                                                       1
                                                     School of Mathematics, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
                                                             2
                                                               Department of Information Engineering, University of Padua, Padua, Italy
                                                3
                                                  School of Information Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology,
                                                                                         Shanghai, China



                                                                                                Abstract

                                                           This paper studies multi-agent reinforcement learning with submodular team utili-
                                                           ties, which models scenarios where N agents solve a non-additive task allocation
                                                           problem in a distributed manner online. Since each agent selects one action from
                                                           a local categorical distribution at each time step, feasible joint actions form a
                                                           partition matroid over agent-action pairs. The standard continuous relaxation of set
                                                           utility functions, the Multilinear Extension, does not encode categorical constraints
                                                           on factorized policies and may yield inconsistent gradient estimation. To remedy
                                                           this, we propose the Partition Multilinear Extension, a continuous relaxation that
                                                           equals the expected team utility with factorized categorical policies under partition
                                                           matroid constraint. We prove that submodular difference rewards provide unbi-
                                                           ased PME marginal-gradient information and induce a stagewise score-function
                                                           policy-gradient estimator for factorized categorical policies. Building on these
                                                           results, we propose SubMAPG, a centralized training with decentralized execu-
                                                           tion (CTDE) multi-agent policy-gradient framework that implements submodular
                                                           difference-reward training signals and masked categorical policies for partition-
                                                           feasible decentralized execution. For the associated PME marginal-space projected
                                                           stochastic-gradient dynamics, we establish a stagewise 1/2-approximation guaran-
                                                           tee and sublinear dynamic regret under slowly varying environments, measured
                                                           by the path length of the optimal PME marginals. Finally, to handle open systems
                                                           where agents and targets may leave and join over time (e.g., modeling failure and
                                                           recovery of robots or smart sensors), we implement SubMAPG with a graph neural
                                                           network policy model. Numerical experiments on multi-robot coverage and multi-
                                                           target tracking show that SubMAPG outperforms local greedy and shared-reward
                                                           baselines, and is competitive with centralized myopic greedy strategies.


                                           1     Introduction

                                           Distributed multi-agent task allocation arises in dynamic target tracking, active sensing, and coverage,
                                           where agents must coordinate under limited communication, partial observability, and non-additive
                                           team utilities. These problems are naturally sequential and time-varying, as targets move, observations
                                           change, and environments evolve over time. Figure 1 illustrates a representative sensing scenario
                                           with mobile agents, dynamic targets, and limited sensing and peer-to-peer communication; agents
                                           and tasks may even vary during prolonged deployments [Zhang et al., 2018a, Deplano et al., 2026].
                                               ∗ Equal contribution.
                                               † Corresponding authors: Fangfei Li and Yang Tang.




                                           Preprint.
                                                                 Figure 1: An open multi-agent sys-
                                                                 tem for task allocation. Mobile sen-
                                                                 sors collaboratively track mobile tar-
                                                                 gets under time-varying agent popula-
                                                                 tions, dynamic tasks, limited commu-
                                                                 nication, and bounded sensing.




A central difficulty in these problems is that team utilities are typically non-additive across agents.
For example, overlapping fields of view in Figure 1 reduce the total area covered by robots, such
that their respective coverage contributions do not add linearly. This so-called diminishing-return
structure is formally captured by monotone submodular utilities. Submodularity provides a principled
basis for combinatorial coordination since, if the feasible set is a matroid, they enable suboptimality
guarantees for greedy selection [Nemhauser et al., 1978, Fisher et al., 2009, Xu et al., 2023, Liu et al.,
2024a] and continuous relaxations such as the Multilinear Extension (MLE) with rounding [Calinescu
et al., 2011, Zhang et al., 2025b]. However, these methods are designed for static, fully observable
optimization problems with centralized coordination and do not inherently accommodate distributed
policies for sequential decision-making, with the notable exception of online greedy selection in [Xu
et al., 2023]. Moreover, even static monotone submodular maximization over a matroid is NP-hard,
and directly searching the discrete joint action space is exponentially costly in the number of agents
and actions [Prajapat et al., 2024, Chen et al., 2026].
In contrast, multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) offers a way to learn distributed coordina-
tion policies for sequential decision-making under partial observability and environment dynamics.
However, recently proposed submodular RL and MARL approaches focus on single-agent or cen-
tralized decision-making [Prajapat et al., 2024, De Santi et al., 2024, Chen et al., 2026]. Distributed
submodular task-allocation methods provide approximation guarantees for online optimization but
do not use MARL [Zhang et al., 2025b].
Moreover, credit assignment under non-additive utilities is inherently harder than the classical
additive case because each agent’s marginal contribution depends critically on the actions of others.
Difference rewards and counterfactual baselines can mitigate this difficulty, yet whether they estimate
a consistent gradient direction for any continuous optimization objective with submodular utilities
remains unknown [Foerster et al., 2018, Castellini et al., 2025]. This motivates our central question:
Can we establish a rigorous mathematical connection between credit assignment and MARL policy
optimization for distributed submodular task allocation under partition matroid constraints?
Achieving this goal requires resolving three challenges. First, consistent policy gradient requires a
continuous objective that is formally equivalent to the expected utility of the executed distributed
policy. The classical Multilinear Extension (MLE) smooths a set function via independent Bernoulli
sampling and typically relies on rounding, creating a mathematical mismatch between the optimization
objective and the categorical policies executed by the agents. Second, difference rewards for multi-
agent credit assignment are typically treated as variance-reduction or reward-shaping signals but it
is unclear if they estimate unbiased, and therefore formally consistent, gradient information for any
partition-feasible continuous objective. Third, task allocation requires scalable local policies that can
handle variable agent and task sets, whereas standard MARL assumes fixed-size inputs [Lowe et al.,
2017, Yu et al., 2022, Anil et al., 2025].
We address these challenges by proposing a Partition Multilinear Extension (PME), a continuous
relaxation that naturally accommodates partition matroid constraints. Unlike the MLE, the PME
equals the expected stage utility of the executed policies. We prove that submodular difference
rewards yield unbiased stagewise PME marginal-gradient information, thereby turning marginal-
contribution credit assignment into consistent stochastic gradient information for partition-feasible
objectives. Building on this connection, we propose SubMAPG, a policy-gradient framework with
centralized utility evaluations during training and decentralized masked-categorical execution. Our
main contributions are:

                                                    2
(1) We formulate distributed multi-agent task allocation under monotone submodular utilities and
    partition-constrained categorical policies. While recent works study single-agent RL with
    submodular global rewards [Prajapat et al., 2024, De Santi et al., 2024], we tackle multi-agent
    policy gradient for centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) with submodular
    stagewise team utilities. In this setting, we introduce the PME, a continuous relaxation that
    equals the expected team utility at each time step under factorized categorical policies.
(2) We propose SubMAPG, a CTDE MARL framework for submodular multi-agent task allocation
    with masked categorical policies. Submodular difference rewards provide unbiased stagewise
    marginal-gradient information for the partition-feasible PME objective. For the associated PME
    marginal-space projected stochastic-gradientp dynamics, we prove a stagewise 1/2-approximation
    guarantee and dynamic regret scaling as O( (1 + PT )T ) under bounded problem parameters,
    which is sublinear whenever the path length PT (which measures how much the optimal PME
    marginal solutions vary between consecutive time steps) satisfies PT ∈ o(T ). Unlike online
    submodular task-allocation methods that optimize instantaneous allocation decisions without
    learning reusable decentralized policies [Zhang et al., 2025a,b] and centralized submodular RL
    and MARL [Prajapat et al., 2024, Chen et al., 2026], SubMAPG links submodular task-allocation
    guarantees to decentralized categorical policy learning.
(3) We instantiate SubMAPG with tabular softmax and GNN policies. The tabular variant follows
    decentralized softmax gradient-play parameterizations [Zhang et al., 2022], while the GNN
    variant provides permutation-invariant decentralized policies for variable-size agent and task
    sets and enables open-system evaluation. Compared with task-open MARL methods focused
    primarily on adaptability [Anil et al., 2025], SubMAPG exploits submodular team utilities to
    obtain PME-based credit-assignment interpretation and partition-feasible decentralized policy
    learning. Experiments on coverage and multi-target tracking show that SubMAPG improves
    over shared-reward and online/local greedy baselines and is competitive with centralized myopic
    greedy methods in several settings.
Related Work. Due to space limitations, we defer the comprehensive literature review and detailed
comparison with submodular optimization, online coordination, and MARL baselines to Appendix C.

2     Multi-Agent Online Submodular Coordination

We formulate task allocation in a Multi-Agent System (MAS) as a decentralized partially observable
sequential decision problem with a monotone submodular team utility. At each round, the active
agent set, available actions, feasible joint-action space, and utility may change over time.

2.1   Problem Formulation

States, Agents, and Actions. Let t ∈ [T ] ≜ {1, . . . , T } denote the round index and let Nt be
the set of active agents at round t. The global state is st ∈ S and includes the active agents, tasks,
and environment variables. Each agent i ∈ Nt chooses an action ai,t from a finite action set Ai,t ,
and the joint action is at = (ai,t )i∈Nt . The system evolves according to a possibly time-varying
controlled transition kernel Pt (· | st , at ). We define the ground set of available agent-action pairs as
Ωt ≜ {(i, a) : i ∈ Nt , a ∈ Ai,t }. The action semantics are application-dependent. An action may
directly assign a task, choose a sensing target, or select a motion primitive that affects future task
allocation.
Partition Matroid Constraint. Each active agent can execute at most one action per round.
Therefore, the ground set decomposes into per-agent subsets Ωi,t ≜ {(i, a) : a ∈ Ai,t }, i ∈ Nt . The
feasible joint-action sets form a partition matroid (Ωt , It ) with It ≜ A ⊆ Ωt : |A ∩ Ωi,t | ≤ 1, ∀i ∈
Nt . Each feasible joint action At ∈ It selects at most one action per agent.
Observations and Decentralized Policies. Each agent receives a local observation oi,t = O(st , i),
which may include onboard sensing and messages from neighboring agents. Let ot ≜ (oi,t )i∈Nt
denote the joint observation vector. We consider decentralized factorized categorical policies
                                                Y
                                  π(at | ot ) =     π i (ai,t | oi,t ),                        (1)
                                                  i∈Nt


                                                    3
where π i (· | oi,t ) is a categorical distribution over Ai,t . This policy class matches decentralized
execution and ensures partition feasibility by construction, since each active agent samples one action
from its own categorical distribution.
Submodular Team Utility. The MAS’s instantaneous performance at each round t is Ft (· ; st ) :
2Ωt → R≥0 . Throughout the paper, Ft is assumed to be normalized, monotone, and submodular for
every st (see Appendix B). This model covers common multi-agent objectives such as coverage [We-
likala et al., 2022], facility location [Zhou and Tokekar, 2019], and information gain [Xu et al., 2025],
where overlapping agent contributions create diminishing returns.
The goal is to learn a decentralized factorized policy that maximizes cumulative submodular utility
while satisfying the partition matroid constraint at every round.
Problem 1 (Online Multi-Agent Submodular Coordination). Given the time-varying MAS, find a
factorized policy π of the form (1) that solves
                                            " T                #
                                             X
                        max J(π) ≜ Eπ            Ft (At ; st )
                          π                                                                     (2)
                                             t=1

                          s.t.   At ≜ {(i, ai,t ) : i ∈ Nt } ∈ It ,      ∀t ∈ [T ].
The expectation is over the trajectory distribution induced by π and {Pt }Tt=1 .
Problem 1 combines partial observability, partition-feasible categorical actions, and sequential state
dependence, making standard centralized submodular optimization relaxations insufficient.

3     Partition Multilinear Extension
Problem (2) is a combinatorial optimization problem over the partition matroid family It , and is
NP-hard even in static submodular maximization settings. Therefore, we introduce a continuous
representation of the stage utility that matches the factorized categorical policies used by decentralized
MARL. For each agent-action pair (i, a) ∈ Ωt , the decision variable x(i,a) ∈ [0, 1] denotes the
marginal probability that agent i selects action a ∈ Ai,t , i.e., x(i,a) = π i (a | oi,t ) under the
factorized policy π = i π i . The standard Multilinear Extension (MLE) [Calinescu et al., 2011]
                         Q
samples each ground-set element independently. Under the partition matroid, this Bernoulli sampling
may select multiple actions for one agent, so the optimized distribution differs from the categorical
policy executed by decentralized agents. We therefore use a categorical extension over the partition
matroid, called the Partition Multilinear Extension (PME). A detailed comparison with MLE and
related policy-based extensions [Zhang et al., 2025a] is given in Appendix C.1.

3.1   Definition and Key Properties

We first define the continuous domain
                                n     associated with the partition matroid (Ωto, It ). The associated
matroid polytope is P(It ) = x ∈ [0, 1]|Ωt | : a∈Ai,t x(i,a) ≤ 1, ∀i ∈ Nt . Any vector x ∈
                                                 P

P(It ) defines a product distribution in which each agent selects at most one feasible action, with the
remaining probability assigned to idling.
Definition 3.1 (Partition Multilinear Extension). Given the partition matroid (Ωt , It ) and the set
function Ft ( · ; st ) : 2Ωt → R≥0 , the partition multilinear extension f˜t ( · ; st ) : P(It ) → R at state
st is                                                     X               Y
                   f˜t (x; st ) ≜ EA∼D(x) [Ft (A; st )] =     Ft (A; st )        pi (A; x),               (3)
                                                          A∈It             i∈Nt
where D(x) denotes the product of independent categorical distributions over agents, and agent i’s
factor is                     
                              x(i,a) ,
                                                     if A ∩ Ωi,t = {(i, a)},
                  pi (A; x) = 1 −                                                              (4)
                                       X
                                          x(i,a′ ) , if A ∩ Ωi,t = ∅.
                                     ′   a ∈Ai,t


                                            P agent subset: agent i selects action a with probability
The PME samples at most one element from each
x(i,a) and remains idle with probability 1 − a∈Ai,t x(i,a) . Although the PME is defined on the full


                                                     4
partition matroid polytope P(It ), the factorized categorical policies in (1) induce marginals on the
smaller face                                                             
                                              X                          
                        Ft ≜ x ∈ P(It ) :            x(i,a) = 1, ∀i ∈ Nt .                        (5)
                                                                         
                                                a∈Ai,t

On Ft , the idle probability in (4) is zero, so the PME exactly represents the expected utility of the
corresponding categorical policy. Since f˜t is monotone, optimizing f˜t over P(It ) has an optimizer
on Ft ; see Appendix D.2. The PME is also nonnegative, monotone, smooth, and DR-submodular
whenever Ft is monotone submodular.
Gradient Characterization. For e ∈ Ωt and A ⊆ Ωt \ {e}, write Ft (e | A; st ) ≜ Ft (A ∪
{e}; st ) − Ft (A; st ). The next result shows that each coordinate of the PME gradient equals the
expected marginal contribution of the corresponding agent-action pair, thereby linking the continuous
relaxation to agent-wise credit assignment.
Lemma 3.1 (Gradient of PME). The partial derivative of f˜t with respect to x(i,a) is given by

                           ∂ f˜t                     h                    i
                                  (x) = EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft (i, a) | A−i ; st ,
                          ∂x(i,a)

where A−i denotes a joint action of all agents except agent i, sampled from the product distribution
D−i (x) over Nt \ {i}.

This lemma shows that each coordinate of the PME gradient is an expected marginal contribution of
one agent-action pair. This observation is the basis for the difference-reward estimator introduced in
Section 4.

3.2   Objective Equivalence

With the PME and its properties established, we now relax the discrete optimization problem (2) into
a continuous maximization problem. We first show that, for any factorized categorical policy, the
PME evaluated at its marginals exactly equals the policy’s expected stage utility.
Lemma 3.2 (Objective Equivalence). Let π = i∈Nt π i be a factorized categorical policy as
                                                            Q

per (1) and define the state-dependent marginal vector xt (st ) by x(i,a) (st ) ≜ π i (a | O(st , i)). Then,
for any fixed state st , the conditional expected stage utility under π equals the PME evaluated at
x(π): EhAt ∼π [Ft (At ; sit ) | st ] = f˜t (xt (st ); st ). Consequently, by the total expectation, Jt (π) =
Est ∼µπt f˜t (xt (st ); st ) , where µπt denotes the marginal state distribution at round t induced by π.
                                       P                                           P
Note that for categorical policies, a x(i,a) (st ) = 1, so the idle mass 1 − a x(i,a) in (4) is exactly
zero, ensuring exact equivalence at every state st .

Lemma 3.2 implies exact distributional equivalence on the categorical-policy face Ft . Since Ft is
monotone, any optimizer of f˜t over the full partition matroid polytope P(It ) can be chosen on Ft ;
hence the continuous optimum over P(It ) matches the optimum achievable by factorized categorical
marginals. Thus, the continuous stage problem can be written as maxx∈P(It ) f˜t (x; st ). In the next
section, we optimize this objective through policy gradients. The gradient identity in Lemma 3.1
implies that submodular difference rewards provide unbiased gradient information for the PME,
which connects the continuous relaxation to decentralized MARL credit assignment.

4     Policy Gradient as DR-Submodular Optimization
The PME reduces the stagewise coordination problem to continuous optimization over policy-induced
marginals. We now show how this structure leads to a policy-gradient algorithm for decentralized
MARL. The key observation is that submodular marginal contributions provide stochastic gradient
information for the PME, while masked categorical policies keep all sampled joint actions feasible
under the partition matroid. This yields SubMAPG, a submodular multi-agent policy gradient
method trained with centralized utility evaluations and executed using decentralized local policies.
The architectural details are deferred to Appendix G.


                                                     5
Algorithm 1 Submodular Multi-Agent Policy Gradient (SubMAPG)
 1: Input: horizon T , step size η, policy-gradient optimizer PG-Optimizer, policy parameters θ0
 2: for k = 1, . . . , K do
 3:   Collect trajectory τ = {(st , At , Ft (At ; st ))}Tt=1 by executing πθk
 4:   for t = 1, . . . , T do
 5:      for each agent i ∈ Nt do
 6:        Compute ri,t = Ft (At ; st ) − Ft (A−i  t ; st )
 7:      end for
 8:   end for
 9:   Compute difference returns Ψi,t using (7)
10:   Estimate the policy-gradient surrogate ∇
                                             d θ J using (8)
11:   Update θk+1 ← PG-Optimizer(θk , ∇     dθ J; η)
12: end for
13: Output: trained policy parameters θK



4.1   Masked Categorical Policies

For each active agent i ∈ Nt , SubMAPG outputs logits over the feasible action set Ai,t and applies a
masked softmax:
                                        exp([Wh hi,t ]a + Ma )
                  πθi (a | oi,t ) = P                                 ,  a ∈ Ai,t ,               (6)
                                     a ∈Ai,t exp([Wh hi,t ]a′ + Ma′ )
                                      ′


where Ma = 0 for feasible actions and Ma = −∞ for infeasible actions. The induced marginal is
x(i,a) (θ) ≜ πθi (a | oi,t ).
By construction, a∈Ai,t πθi (a | oi,t ) = 1, so x(θ) ∈ Ft and every sampled joint action is feasible
                    P

under the partition matroid. Thus the masked categorical policy matches the feasible marginal space
on which the PME equals the expected categorical-policy utility; the formal statement is given
in Appendix E.1. For tabular softmax policies, Appendix E.1.2 shows that the parameter update
induces a first-order feasible ascent direction on Ft . For neural policies, our approximation and
regret guarantees characterize the induced x-space projected stochastic-gradient dynamics rather than
general parameter-space convergence.

4.2   Submodular Difference Rewards

A shared team reward Ft (At ; st ) gives all agents the same scalar feedback and therefore obscures each
agent’s contribution to the PME gradient.    We use the submodular marginal contribution as the agent’s
reward: ri,t ≜ Ft (i, ai,t ) | A−i                                −i               −i
                                        
                                t  ; st   = F t (At ; st ) − Ft (At ; st ), where At ≜ At \ {(i, ai,t )} is
the joint action set with agent i removed.
By Lemma 3.1, for any fixed action a ∈ Ai,t , the random variable Ft ((i, a) | A−i
                                                                                t ; st ) is an unbiased
estimator of the PME coordinate gradient ∂ f˜t (x; st )/∂x(i,a) when A−i       −i
                                                                      t ∼ D (x).
Thus, submodular difference rewards are not only variance-reduction heuristics, but provide gradient
information for the PME objective. Proposition E.2 formalizes this observation by showing that
agent-action marginal gains give unbiased estimates of the PME marginal gradient; see Appendix E.2.
This PME marginal-gradient estimator is used in the PME marginal-space analysis in Section 5.
4.3 Submodular Policy Gradient

We next state the stagewise policy-gradient identity that connects the PME marginal-gradient estimator
to parameter updates of the factorized categorical policy.
Lemma 4.1 (Stagewise Submodular Policy Gradient Estimator). Fix a round t and
state st .       Let x(i,a) (θ) = πθi (a | oi,t ) and define the conditional stage ob-
jective JPt (θ; st )    ≜ EAt ∼πθ [Ft (At ; st ) | st ] = f˜t (x(θ); s           t ).    Then ∇θ Jt (θ; st ) =
                               i                                  −i
EAt ∼πθ       i∈Nt   ∇ θ log πθ  (ai,t | oi,t ) Ft ((i, ai,t ) | At  ; st ) − b i,t   ,  where bi,t is any term inde-
pendent of ai,t conditional on st , oi,t , and the other agents’ sampled actions.
Lemma 4.1 follows from the score-function identity, policy factorization, and the action-independence
of Ft (A−i                     −i
        t ; st ) given st and At ; see Appendix E.2. It justifies the sampled-action difference reward


                                                         6
in Algorithm 1 as a stagewise policy-gradient signal, while Section 5 analyzes projected stochastic-
gradient dynamics over PME marginals.
For the sequential objective, an action at time t may affect future states and future utilities. Therefore,
accumulated counterfactual terms are not generally action-independent baselines for the full return,
and the following return should not be interpreted as an unbiased gradient estimator of the full
trajectory objective in (2). In the implementation, SubMAPG uses accumulated difference returns as
a Monte Carlo surrogate training signal [Sutton and Barto, 2018]:
                                        T
                                        X
                               Ψi,t =         Fk ((i, ai,k ) | A−i
                                                                k ; sk ) − bi,t .                       (7)
                                        k=t
The corresponding sample-based stagewise surrogate is
                                        T X
                                        X
                              ∇
                              d θJ =               ∇θ log πθi (ai,t | oi,t ) Ψi,t .                     (8)
                                        t=1 i∈Nt

Algorithm 1 summarizes SubMAPG. Training uses centralized evaluations of Ft (At ; st ) and
Ft (A−i
      t ; st ) to compute submodular difference rewards, while execution is decentralized through
local masked categorical policies. The optimizer can be instantiated by tabular stochastic gradient
ascent or neural actor-critic updates; implementation details are in Appendix G.

5     Main Results: Performance Guarantees
This section establishes theoretical guarantees for projected stochastic-gradient dynamics on the
PME marginal space Ft . By Lemma 3.2, each marginal iterate xt ∈ Ft corresponds to a factorized
categorical policy with identical expected stage utility at the realized state. These results are not
parameter-space convergence guarantees for general neural policies; rather, they characterize the
PME marginal-space dynamics targeted by SubMAPG. Tabular softmax provides a clean parame-
terized instantiation that induces feasible PME marginal-ascent directions on Ft , while the neural
implementation is evaluated empirically as a scalable approximation.

5.1   Stagewise Approximation Guarantee

We first analyze a fixed round t with fixed state-dependent utility Ft (·; st ) and feasible family It . Our
goal is to bound the gap between the expected utility of a categorical policy induced by the projected
marginal iterate and the optimal discrete action set for this fixed stage.
Definition 5.1 (Stagewise (α, ϵ)-Approximation). Given α > 0 and ϵ ≥ 0, a policy π achieves a
stagewise (α, ϵ)-approximation if, for every round t, EAt ∼π(·|ot ) [Ft (At ; st )] ≥ α OPTt (st ) − ϵ,
where OPTt (st ) ≜ maxA∈It Ft (A; st ) is the optimal discrete utility at state st .
The proof uses the fact that the categorical-policy face Ft is a convex face of the partition ma-
troid polytope, that the PME satisfies the restricted DR first-order inequality on this face, and that
monotonicity ensures an optimal PME solution exists on Ft ; see Lemma F.2.
Theorem 5.1 (Stagewise Approximation). Consider the projected stochastic gradient
                                                                              p        ascent iterates
on Ft : xk+1 = ΠFt (xk + ηgk ), where gk satisfies Lemma F.1. Let η = D/ K(G + σ 2 ), where
                                                                                      2
D = maxx,y∈Ft ∥x − y∥2 . Under Assumption B.1 and Lemma F.2,
                          K−1                                      √
                        1 X h˜               i 1                 D G2 + σ 2
                              E ft (xk ; st ) ≥ OPTt (st ) −          √       .                    (9)
                       K                          2                 2 K
                          k=0
Consequently, if k ∗ is sampled uniformly from {0, . . . , K − 1} and πk∗ is the factorized categorical
                                                                                    D(G+σ)
policy with marginal vector xk∗ , then E[EAt ∼πk∗[Ft (At ; st )]] ≥ 21 OPTt (st ) − 2√  K
                                                                                            . The outer
                                            ∗
expectation is over the random choice of k and the stochastic gradient iterates.
Theorem 5.1 characterizes the approximation power of projected stochastic gradient ascent when it is
allowed to take multiple steps on the same stage objective f˜t . In the sequential setting, this result
serves as a static PME marginal-space benchmark that justifies the constant α = 1/2 in our dynamic
regret analysis (Section 5.2).

                                                       7
5.2   Dynamic Regret Analysis

We now consider the open-system setting where the utility Ft , active agent set Nt , ground set Ωt ,
and feasible face Ft may change over time. Following online learning theory [Zinkevich, 2003,
Hazan, 2016], we use a constant step size to balance stochastic gradient noise and the ability to track
a moving comparator. We measure performance against a dynamic α-approximation benchmark.
Definition 5.2 (Dynamic α-Regret). Given α ∈ (0, 1], the expected dynamic α-regret ofia policy
                           α         PT h
πθ over horizon T is RegretT (πθ ) ≜    t=1 α Est ∼µt θ [OPTt (st )] − Eπθ [Ft (At ; st )] , where
                                                      π


OPTt (st ) ≜ maxA∈It Ft (A; st ) and µπt θ is the state distribution at round t induced by πθ .

This regret is policy-consistent: both the benchmark and the achieved utility are evaluated under the
same state distribution µtπθ . This avoids comparing against a clairvoyant trajectory distribution that is
unavailable in an online Dec-POMDP.
To quantify non-stationarity across time-varying agent sets, we first embed all marginal vectors
                                                                      a
into a common Euclidean space. Let Nmax = maxt |Nt | and Nmax             = maxt,i |Ai,t |. We define an
                                                             a
                                                      Nmax Nmax
isometric zero-padding embedding ιt : Ft → R                     by assigning each agent i ∈ Nt a fixed
index slot in {1, . . . , Nmax } and padding coordinates of inactive agents with zeros. Since ιt preserves
ℓ2 norms and inner products on the support of Ft , all subsequent distances are well-defined in the
common ambient space. The expected path length of the optimal continuous solutions is defined as
                                          "T −1                           #
                                            X
                                                      ∗            ∗
                                 PT ≜ E          ιt (xt ) − ιt+1 (xt+1 ) 2 ,                          (10)
                                          t=1

where x∗t ∈ arg maxx∈Ft f˜t (x; st ) is an optimal continuous solution at the realized state st , and the
expectation is over the trajectory induced by πθ . A small PT means that the optimal PME marginals
drift slowly over time, even though the open system changes dimension.
For readability, define the polytope diameter D ≜ maxt,u∈[T ] maxx∈ιt (Ft ), y∈ιu (Fu ) ∥x − y∥2 ,
                                                               ˜
largest gradient magnitude G ≜ hmaxt maxx∈Ft supst i      ∈S ∥∇ft (x; st )∥2 , and gradient estimator
variance bound σ 2 ≜ maxt∈[T ] E ∥gt − ∇f˜t (xt ; st )∥22 . Because each active agent’s marginal
                                                √                                           √
vector lies in a probability simplex of diameter 2, the embedded feasible sets satisfy D ≤ 2Nmax .
Theorem 5.2 (Dynamic Regret Bound). Suppose Ft (·; st ) satisfies Assumption B.1 for all t ∈ [T ].
Then f˜t (·; st ) is nonnegative, monotone, and DR-submodular on the partition matroid polytope
P(It ). Since Ft ⊆ P(It ), the first-order gap inequality in Lemma F.2(ii) applies to all x, y ∈
Ft . Let {xt }Tt=1 denote the feasible PME marginal sequence evaluated at the realized states and
generated by the two-step projected stochastic-gradient dynamics x̄t+1 = ΠFt (xt + ηgt ), and
xt+1 = ΠFt+1 (x̄t+1 ). Here gt is a stochastic PME gradient estimator satisfying Lemma F.1, and
η > 0 is constant. Then
                           h                 i D2     DPT   ηT (G2 + σ 2 )
                                     1/2
                          E RegretT (π) ≤           +     +                .                  (11)
                                                 4η    2η        4
                          q
Moreover, setting η ∗ = D(D+2P         T)
                              T (G2 +σ 2 ) gives
                         h           i 1p
                                1/2
                        E RegretT (π) ≤   D(D + 2PT ) T (G2 + σ 2 ).                                 (12)
                                        2

The first two terms in (11) are the initialization and tracking costs,
                                                                  √ while the last term is the cumulative
stochastic-gradient cost. Combining Lemma F.1 with D ≤ 2Nmax gives the explicit dimension-
dependent scaling in Appendix F.4.1.
Corollary 5.1 (Sublinear Regret). If D, G, and
                                             h σ are uniformly
                                                            i bounded and the path length
                                           1         1/2
satisfies PT = o(T ), then lim supT →∞ T E RegretT (π) ≤ 0. Equivalently, the pol-
                                                             PT
icy is asymptotically 1/2-optimal on average: lim inf T →∞ T1 t=1 Eπ [Ft (At ; st )] ≥ 21 ·
               PT
lim inf T →∞ T1 t=1 Est ∼µπt [OPTt (st )].


                                                    8
                                                                                                      1.0                                                                0.4                                                                  1.0




                                                                                                                                                Average Regret vs OSG
                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SubMAPG-M




                                                                        Coverage Ratio                                                                                                                                  Coverage Ratio
                                                                                                      0.8                                                                                                                                     0.8




Coverage Ratio
                     0.8                                                                                                                                                 0.3                              Tabular
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MASubPO
                     0.6                                                                              0.6                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                CSG                                      0.2                                                                                             CSG
                                                                                                      0.4                       SubMAPG-M                                                                                                     0.4                        SubMAPG-M
                     0.4
                                                      SubMAPG-M                                                                 Tabular                                  0.1                                                                                             Tabular
                     0.2                              MASubPO                                         0.2                       MASubPO                                                                                                       0.2                        MASubPO
                                                      Tabular                                                                   OSG                                      0.0                                                                                             OSG
                     0.0                                                                              0.0                                                                                                                                     0.0
                        0       20      40       60      80       100                                       0   500     1000    1500     2000                                  0       500        1000    1500   2000                               0   500      1000     1500   2000
                                Training Progress (%)                                                                   Steps                                                                     Steps                                                         Steps
              (a) Coverage train (GP)                                                   (b) Open cov. ratio (GP)                                                  (c) Open cov. gap (GP)                                        (d) Open cov. (Bimodal)




                                                                        Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent
                                     CSG-g                                                                                                                               100                       CSG-l




Cumulative Utility                                                                                                                                  Cumulative Utility                                                   Cumulative Utility
                     100             CSG-l                                                            8.0                                                                                          OSG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6
                                     G-MLP                                                                                                                                80                       SubMAPG-G(scaled)
                      75             SubMAPG-G                                                                                                                                                     SubMAPG-G(fixed)
                                                                                                      6.0
                                     OSG                                                                                                                                  60                                                                  4
                      50             SubMAPG-M
                                                                                                      4.0                                                                 40
                      25                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2                         SubMAPG-M
                                                                                                      2.0                                                                 20                                                                                            G-MLP
                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                            0           1000             2000                                               0         1000        2000                                         12            24           36       48                                   2000        4000         6000
                                             Steps                                                                      Steps                                                       Number of Agents/Targets                                                  Episode

                       (e) Tracking utility                                                            (f) Tracking distance                                              (g) Zero-shot scaling                                                   (h) Reward ablation
  Figure 2: Main empirical results. Top row: information coverage on the Gaussian Process and
  Bimodal density field. Bottom row: dynamic target tracking under open-system evaluation, zero-shot
  scaling, and reward ablation.

 Together, Theorems 5.1–5.2 show that PME marginal-space projected stochastic ascent admits
 static approximation and dynamic tracking guarantees. These guarantees characterize marginal-
 space dynamics; neural SubMAPG approximates them through masked-softmax policies and GNN
 encoders.
  6                         Numerical Experiments
We evaluate SubMAPG on information coverage [Prajapat et al., 2024] and dynamic multi-target
tracking [Xu et al., 2023]. SubMAPG-M and SubMAPG-G denote MLP- and GNN-encoder instanti-
ations, respectively; both use masked categorical policies and submodular difference rewards. Full
protocols and additional results are in Appendix H.
Multi-Agent Information Coverage. We evaluate SubMAPG-M on a 30 × 30 grid coverage
task with up to five agents. Each agent chooses from five motion actions and P    covers cells within
radius rcov = 1; the team utility is the total covered information value F (At ) = v∈∪i∈N Di,t ρ(v).
                                                                                           t
Policies are trained in closed environments and evaluated in open environments over T = 2000
steps with agent arrivals and departures. We compare with centralized sequential greedy with global
sensing (CSG), a tabular softmax [Zhang et al., 2022], MASubPO [Prajapat et al., 2024], and online
submodular greedy (OSG) [Xu et al., 2023], and Figures 2(a)–(d) show that SubMAPG-M converges
faster than MASubPO, maintains high coverage under openness, and achieves a smaller empirical
utility gap relative to OSG on the Gaussian Process and Bimodal Gaussian density fields.
Dynamic Multi-Target Tracking. We evaluate the GNN-based SubMAPG-G in a 100m × 100m
tracking environment with mobile agents and targets. Agents use unicycle dynamics, select one
of 12 steering actions, observe targets within rsen = 10m, and communicate within rcom = 25m.
In open evaluation, agents and targets arrive and depart over T = 2500 steps. We compare with
CSG-g, centralized greedy with local sensing (CSG-l), a shared-reward ablation (G-MLP), OSG,
and SubMAPG-M. Figures 2(e)–(h) show that SubMAPG-G achieves cumulative utility comparable
to centralized greedy, keeps target-agent distances low using only local observations, and transfers
zero-shot from systems with up to 12 agents and targets to systems with up to 48; the reward ablation
confirms that submodular difference rewards outperform shared global rewards under the same MLP
encoder, isolating the benefit of marginal-contribution credit assignment.

  7                         Conclusion
  In this paper, we introduced SubMAPG, a distributed policy-gradient framework for submodular
  multi-agent task allocation. The PME exactly represents the expected stage utility of partition-
  feasible categorical policies, while submodular difference rewards provide unbiased stagewise PME
  marginal-gradient information. For projected stochastic-gradient updates in the PME marginal
  space, we established stagewise approximation and dynamic regret guarantees. The tabular-softmax


                                                                                                                                                9
results empirically corroborate the PME marginal-space analysis, while the MLP and GNN results
demonstrate scalable performance on coverage, tracking, open-system evaluation, and variable-size
generalization. These guarantees are stated in the PME marginal space rather than for general
neural parameter updates; extending the analysis to neural parameterizations, richer communication
constraints, and broader utility classes is left for future work.

References
Alireza Saleh Abadi and Leen-Kiat Soh. Challenges in credit assignment for multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning in open agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.27659, 2025.
Gayathri Anil, Prashant Doshi, Daniel Alan Redder, Adam Eck, and Leen-Kiat Soh. Mohito: Multi-
  agent reinforcement learning using hypergraphs for task-open systems. In The 41st Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2025.
Andrew An Bian, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Joachim Buhmann, and Andreas Krause. Guaranteed
  non-convex optimization: Submodular maximization over continuous domains. In Proceedings
  of the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 54, pages
 111–120. PMLR, 2017.
Gruia Calinescu, Chandra Chekuri, Martin Pal, and Jan Vondrák. Maximizing a monotone submodular
  function subject to a matroid constraint. SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(6):1740–1766, 2011.
Jacopo Castellini, Sam Devlin, Frans A Oliehoek, and Rahul Savani. Difference rewards policy
  gradients. Neural Computing and Applications, 37(19):13163–13186, 2025.
Juan Cerviño, Saurav Agarwal, Vijay Kumar, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Constrained learning for
  decentralized multi-objective coverage control. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation (ICRA), pages 13780–13786. IEEE, 2025.
Wenjing Chen, Chengyuan Qian, Shuo Xing, Yi Zhou, and Victoria Crawford. Multi-agent reinforce-
 ment learning with submodular reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06810, 2026.
Riccardo De Santi, Manish Prajapat, and Andreas Krause. Global reinforcement learning: beyond
  linear and convex rewards via submodular semi-gradient methods. In Proceedings of the 41st
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235, pages 10235–10266. JMLR, 2024.
Diego Deplano, Nicola Bastianello, Mauro Franceschelli, and Karl H. Johansson. Optimization and
  learning in open multi-agent systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, pages 1–16, 2026.
Marshall L Fisher, George L Nemhauser, and Laurence A Wolsey. An analysis of approximations
 for maximizing submodular set functions—II. In Polyhedral Combinatorics: Dedicated to the
 memory of DR Fulkerson, pages 73–87. Springer, 2009.
Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
  Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 32, pages 2974–2982, 2018.
Hamed Hassani, Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Amin Karbasi. Gradient methods for submodular
  maximization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Elad Hazan. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends in Optimization, 2
  (3-4):157–325, 2016.
Weihua Hu, Bowen Liu, Joseph Gomes, Marinka Zitnik, Percy Liang, Vijay Pande, and Jure Leskovec.
 Strategies for pre-training graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2020.
Jiechuan Jiang, Chen Dun, Tiejun Huang, and Zongqing Lu. Graph convolutional reinforcement
   learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Mohamad H Kazma and Ahmad F Taha. Multilinear extensions in submodular optimization for
 optimal sensor scheduling in nonlinear networks. In 2025 American Control Conference (ACC),
 pages 3022–3027. IEEE, 2025.


                                                10
Branislav Kveton, Anup Rao, Viet Dac Lai, Nikos Vlassis, and David Arbour. Adaptive submodular
  policy optimization. Reinforcement Learning Journal, 6:2720–2736, 2025.
Matthew Lai, Keegan Go, Zhibin Li, Torsten Kröger, Stefan Schaal, Kelsey Allen, and Jonathan
 Scholz. Roboballet: Planning for multirobot reaching with graph neural networks and reinforce-
 ment learning. Science Robotics, 10(106):eads1204, 2025.
Jing Liu, Fangfei Li, Xin Jin, and Yang Tang. Distributed task allocation for multi-agent systems: A
   submodular optimization approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02146, 2024a.
Yuxuan Liu, Maojiao Ye, Lei Ding, Lihua Xie, and Shengyuan Xu. Distributed online resource
  allocation in open networks. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 69(12):8876–8883, 2024b.
Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
  critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Jincheng Mei, Chenjun Xiao, Csaba Szepesvari, and Dale Schuurmans. On the global convergence
   rates of softmax policy gradient methods. In International conference on machine learning, pages
   6820–6829. PMLR, 2020.
George L Nemhauser, Laurence A Wolsey, and Marshall L Fisher. An analysis of approximations for
  maximizing submodular set functions—I. Mathematical programming, 14:265–294, 1978.
Gabriele Oliva, Mauro Franceschelli, Andrea Gasparri, and Antonio Scala. A sum-of-states preser-
  vation framework for open multiagent systems with nonlinear heterogeneous coupling. IEEE
 Transactions on Automatic Control, 69(3):1991–1998, 2023.
Manish Prajapat, Mojmı́r Mutnỳ, Melanie N Zeilinger, and Andreas Krause. Submodular reinforce-
 ment learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Guannan Qu, Dave Brown, and Na Li. Distributed greedy algorithm for multi-agent task assignment
  problem with submodular utility functions. Automatica, 105:206–215, 2019.
Seyed Ali Rakhshan, Mehdi Golestani, and He Kong. Observability-driven assignment of heteroge-
  neous sensors for multi-target tracking. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
  Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 12100–12107, 2025.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder De Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(178):1–51, 2020.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, MA, 2018.
Artin Tajdini, Lalit Jain, and Kevin Jamieson. Nearly minimax optimal submodular maximization
  with bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:96254–96281,
  2024.
Shirantha Welikala, Christos G Cassandras, Hai Lin, and Panos J Antsaklis. A new performance
  bound for submodular maximization problems and its application to multi-agent optimal coverage
  problems. Automatica, 144:110493, 2022.
David H Wolpert and Kagan Tumer. Collective intelligence, data routing and braess’ paradox. Journal
  of Artificial Intelligence Research, 16:359–387, 2002.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Zirui Xu, Hongyu Zhou, and Vasileios Tzoumas. Online submodular coordination with bounded
  tracking regret: Theory, algorithm, and applications to multi-robot coordination. IEEE Robotics
  and Automation Letters, 8(4):2261–2268, 2023.


                                                11
Zirui Xu, Sandilya Sai Garimella, and Vasileios Tzoumas. Communication-and computation-efficient
  distributed submodular optimization in robot mesh networks. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 41:
  3480–3499, 2025.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Jiaxuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The
  surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:24611–24624, 2022.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, Han Liu, Tong Zhang, and Tamer Basar. Fully decentralized multi-
  agent reinforcement learning with networked agents. In Proceedings of the 35th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80, pages 5872–5881. PMLR, 2018a.
Lijun Zhang, Tianbao Yang, Zhi-Hua Zhou, et al. Dynamic regret of strongly adaptive methods.
  In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80, pages
  5882–5891. PMLR, 2018b.
Mingrui Zhang, Lin Chen, Hamed Hassani, and Amin Karbasi. Online continuous submodular maxi-
 mization: From full-information to bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 32, 2019.
Qixin Zhang, Zengde Deng, Zaiyi Chen, Kuangqi Zhou, Haoyuan Hu, and Yu Yang. Online learning
  for non-monotone dr-submodular maximization: From full information to bandit feedback. In
  Proceedings of The 26th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume
  206, pages 3515–3537. PMLR, 2023.
Qixin Zhang, Yan Sun, Can Jin, Xikun Zhang, Yao Shu, Puning Zhao, Li Shen, and Dacheng
  Tao. Effective policy learning for multi-agent online coordination beyond submodular objectives.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 38:164278–164339, 2025a.
Qixin Zhang, Zongqi Wan, Yu Yang, Li Shen, and Dacheng Tao. Near-optimal online learning for
  multi-agent submodular coordination: Tight approximation and communication efficiency. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, pages 20166–20198, 2025b.
Runyu Zhang, Jincheng Mei, Bo Dai, Dale Schuurmans, and Na Li. On the global convergence rates
  of decentralized softmax gradient play in markov potential games. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:1923–1935, 2022.
Lifeng Zhou and Pratap Tokekar. Sensor assignment algorithms to improve observability while
  tracking targets. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 35(5):1206–1219, 2019.
Martin Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In
 Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2003), pages
 928–936. AAAI Press, 2003.




                                                12
Appendix

Appendix Contents

A List of Symbols                                                                                  14

B Preliminaries                                                                                    16

C Related Work                                                                                     17
   C.1 Comparison with Existing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18

D Proofs for Section 3                                                                             19
   D.1 Proof of Gradient of PME (Lemma 3.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
   D.2 Properties of the Partition Multilinear Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
   D.3 Proof of Objective Equivalence (Lemma 3.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          22

E Proofs for Section 4                                                                             23
   E.1 Masked-Softmax Feasibility and Policy Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         23
         E.1.1   Masked-softmax Feasibility (Lemma E.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23
         E.1.2   Proof of Proposition E.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
   E.2 Unbiased PME Gradient Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          24
         E.2.1   Proof of Proposition E.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24
         E.2.2   Proof of Lemma E.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
         E.2.3   Unbiased PME Gradient Estimator via Policy Gradient (Lemma 4.1) . . . .           26

F Proofs for Section 5                                                                             27
   F.1   Auxiliary Results for the Main Guarantees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
         F.1.1   Stochastic Gradient Properties (Lemma F.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
         F.1.2   DR-Submodularity on Boundary Face (Lemma F.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . .           28
         F.1.3   Pointwise-to-Expected Gap (Lemma F.3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         30
   F.2   Stagewise Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
   F.3   Dynamic Regret Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
   F.4   Explicit Bounds and Sublinear Regret . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
         F.4.1   Explicit Parameter Bounds     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   33
         F.4.2   Sublinear Regret (Corollary 5.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    34

G Algorithm                                                                                        35
   G.1 Policy Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     35
   G.2 Network Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      36

H Simulation Details and Additional Experiments                                                    37
   H.1 Multi-Agent Information Coverage and Optimality Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .            37
   H.2 Multi-Agent Target Tracking and Performance Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          40


                                                13
A      List of Symbols

                                     General Indices and Sets
t                   ≜    Time/round index, t ∈ [T ] ≜ {1, . . . , T }.
T                   ≜    Horizon length / total number of rounds.
K                   ≜    Number of policy update iterations.
i                   ≜    Agent index, i ∈ Nt .
j                   ≜    Task/target index, j ∈ Mt when tasks or targets are considered.
Nt                  ≜    Active agent set at round t.
Mt                  ≜    Active task/target set at round t in the experiments.
Nmax                ≜    Maximum number of active agents, Nmax = maxt |Nt |.
Mmax                ≜    Maximum number of active tasks/targets, Mmax = maxt |Mt |.
  a                                                    a
Nmax                ≜    Maximum action-set size, Nmax      = maxt,i |Ai,t |.
N0                  ≜    Number of active agents at the initial round in tracking experiments.
M0                  ≜    Number of active targets at the initial round in tracking experiments.
                           MAS State, Observation, and Action Model
st                  ≜ Global state at round t, including active agents, tasks, and environment vari-
                      ables.
S                   ≜ Global state space.
Pt (· | st , at )   ≜ Time-varying controlled transition kernel.
Ai,t                ≜ Discrete feasible action set of agent i at round t.
ai,t                ≜ Action sampled or executed by agent i at round t.
at                  ≜ Joint action tuple, at = (ai,t )i∈Nt .
oi,t                ≜ Local observation of agent i at round t.
ot                  ≜ Joint observation tuple, ot = (oi,t )i∈Nt .
O                   ≜ Observation map or observation space, depending on context.
                                Ground Set and Partition Matroid
Ωt                  ≜    Ground set of agent-action pairs at round t: Ωt = {(i, a) : i ∈ Nt , a ∈ Ai,t }.
Ωi,t                ≜    Agent-i subset in the partition: Ωi,t = {(i, a) : a ∈ Ai,t }.
At                  ≜    Realized joint action set, At = {(i, ai,t ) : i ∈ Nt } ∈ It .
A−i
  t                 ≜    Joint action set excluding agent i: A−it = At \ {(i, ai,t )}.
A−i                 ≜    Generic partial joint action of all agents except agent i.
It                  ≜    Feasible family of the partition matroid: It = {A ⊆ Ωt : |A ∩ Ωi,t | ≤ 1, ∀i ∈
                         Nt }.
It−i                ≜    Feasible family for all agents except i, defined over Nt \ {i}.
                         Partition matroid polytope: {x ∈ [0, 1]|Ωt | : a∈Ai,t x(i,a) ≤ 1, ∀i ∈ Nt }.
                                                                         P
P(It )              ≜
Ft                  ≜    Categorical-policy
                         P                    face of the partition matroid polytope: {x ∈ P(It ) :
                                   x
                            a∈Ai,t (i,a)  = 1, ∀i ∈ Nt }.
x(i,a)              ≜    Marginal probability that agent i selects action a.
x                   ≜    Vector of action marginals over Ωt .
xt                  ≜    Marginal vector at round t in the PME marginal-space dynamics.
x(θ)                ≜    Marginal vector induced by πθ , with x(i,a) (θ) = πθi (a | oi,t ).
x∗t                 ≜    Optimal continuous solution at round t: x∗t ∈ arg maxx∈Ft f˜t (x; st ).
                                       Submodular Utilities
Ft ( · ; st )       ≜ Stage utility set function, Ft ( · ; st ) : 2Ωt → R≥0 , assumed normalized,
                      monotone, and submodular.
Ft (e | A; st )     ≜ Marginal gain of element e: Ft (e | A; st ) = Ft (A ∪ {e}; st ) − Ft (A; st ).



                                               14
Ft ((i, a) | A−i ; st )   ≜ Marginal contribution of agent-action pair (i, a) given the other agents’ action
                            set A−i .
B                         ≜ Uniform bound on marginal gains: 0 ≤ Ft (e | A; st ) ≤ B.
Ftcov                     ≜ Coverage utility in the information coverage experiment.
Fttrk                     ≜ Tracking utility in the multi-target tracking experiment.
                                           Continuous Relaxations
ftmle (x)                 ≜ Standard Bernoulli-based Multilinear Extension used in classical submodular
                            maximization.
f˜t (x; st )              ≜ Partition Multilinear Extension (PME): f˜t (x; st ) = EA∼D(x) [Ft (A; st )].
D(x)                      ≜ Product distribution of independent per-agent categorical factors induced by x.
D−i (x)                   ≜ Product distribution over agents Nt \ {i} induced by x.
                                                                                               P
pi (A; x)                 ≜ Agent-i factor in the PME: x(i,a) if A ∩ Ωi,t = {(i, a)}, and 1 − a′ x(i,a′ ) if
                            A ∩ Ωi,t = ∅.
χe                        ≜ Standard basis vector associated with element e in the definition of DR-
                            submodularity.
e(i,a)                    ≜ Standard basis vector associated with coordinate (i, a).
                                         Policies and Policy Gradient
                              Joint factorized categorical policy, π(at | ot ) = i∈Nt π i (ai,t | oi,t ).
                                                                                   Q
π                         ≜
πi                        ≜   Local categorical policy of agent i over Ai,t .
πθ                        ≜   Parameterized factorized policy with parameters θ.
πθi                       ≜   Parameterized local policy of agent i.
π −i                          Joint policy of all agents except i: π −i = j∈Nt \{i} π j .
                                                                          Q
                          ≜
θ                         ≜   Policy parameters.
ϕ                         ≜   Value-function parameters in the actor-critic implementation.
                                                                   PT
J(π)                      ≜   Cumulative objective, J(π) = Eπ [ t=1 Ft (At ; st )].
                                                                              PT
J(θ)                      ≜   Cumulative objective under πθ , J(θ) = Eπθ [ t=1 Ft (At ; st )].
Jt (π)                    ≜   Expected stage utility, Jt (π) = Eπ [Ft (At ; st )].
Jt (θ)                    ≜   Expected stage utility under πθ , Jt (θ) = EAt ∼πθ [Ft (At ; st )].
µπt                       ≜   Marginal state distribution at round t induced by policy π.
µπt θ                     ≜   Marginal state distribution at round t induced by policy πθ .
ri,t                      ≜   Agent-wise submodular difference reward, ri,t = Ft (At ; st ) − Ft (A−i   t ; st ).
rt                        ≜   Shared global or temporal team reward used by baselines or ablations.
                                                          PT
Ψi,t                      ≜   Difference return, Ψi,t = k=t Fk ((i, ai,k ) | A−i   k ; sk ) − bi,t .
bi,t                      ≜   Agent- and time-dependent baseline that is independent of ai,t under the
                              conditioning used in Lemma 4.1.
gt                        ≜   Stochastic PME gradient estimator based on submodular marginal contributions
                              at round t.
gk                        ≜   Stochastic gradient estimator used at policy update iteration k.
∇
d θJ                      ≜   Monte Carlo estimate of the policy-gradient surrogate used in Algorithm 1.
η                         ≜   Step size.
η∗                        ≜   Optimized constant step size in the dynamic regret bound.
                                    Approximation and Dynamic Regret
OPTt (st )                ≜ Optimal discrete utility at state st : OPTt (st ) = maxA∈It Ft (A; st ).
α                         ≜ Approximation factor, e.g., α = 1/2 in the main guarantees.
ϵ                         ≜ Additive approximation error in the definition of stagewise (α, ϵ)-
                            approximation.
                                               PT
Regretα
      T (πθ )             ≜ Dynamic α-regret: t=1 [α Est ∼µπt θ [OPTt (st )] − Eπθ [Ft (At ; st )]].



                                                     15
PT                    ≜ Expected path length of optimal continuous solutions:                PT        =
                          PT −1        ∗            ∗
                        E[ t=1 ∥ιt (xt ) − ιt+1 (xt+1 )∥2 ].
                                                                              a
ιt                    ≜ Isometric zero-padding embedding, ιt : Ft → RNmax Nmax .
D                     ≜ Uniform diameter of embedded feasible faces,                      D            =
                        maxt,u∈[T ] maxx∈ιt (Ft ), y∈ιu (Fu ) ∥x − y∥2 .
G                     ≜ Uniform gradient norm bound, G = maxt maxx∈Ft supst ∈S ∥∇f˜t (x; st )∥2 .
σ2                    ≜ Gradient estimator variance bound, σ 2 = maxt∈[T ] E[∥gt − ∇f˜t (xt ; st )∥22 ].
ΠFt                   ≜ Euclidean projection onto Ft .
TFt (x)               ≜ Tangent space of Ft at x.
projTFt (x)           ≜ Projection onto the tangent space TFt (x).
                                     Policy Architecture Symbols
Φθ                    ≜ GNN encoder mapping graph-structured observations to node-level latent
                        representations.
Gi,t                  ≜ Local observation graph used by agent i at round t.
Gt                    ≜ Global state graph used by the critic in the GNN implementation.
Et                    ≜ Edge set containing communication and sensing links.
hi,t                  ≜ Latent embedding of agent i at round t.
Wh                    ≜ Learnable projection from latent embeddings to action logits.
Ma                    ≜ Mask value in the masked softmax: Ma = 0 for feasible actions and Ma =
                        −∞ for infeasible actions.
Vϕ                    ≜ Centralized value function used by the critic.
k                     ≜ Number of nearest neighboring agents or targets used by the MLP encoder
                        when fixed-dimensional inputs are constructed.
                                         Experiment Symbols
Di,t                  ≜ Set of grid cells covered by agent i at round t in the coverage experiment.
ρ(v)                  ≜ Information density at grid cell v.
v                     ≜ Grid cell index in the coverage utility.
rcov                  ≜ Coverage radius in the information coverage experiment.
rcom                  ≜ Communication radius.
rsen                  ≜ Sensing radius.
pi,t                  ≜ Position of agent i at round t.
qj,t                  ≜ Position of target j at round t.
pxi,t , pyi,t         ≜ Cartesian coordinates of agent i at round t.
va                    ≜ Agent speed.
vm                    ≜ Target speed.
∆t                    ≜ Time-step interval in the tracking dynamics.
ψi,t                  ≜ Heading angle of agent i at round t.
ωi,t                  ≜ Angular velocity or steering action of agent i at round t.


B       Preliminaries
Definition B.1 (Submodular Function [Nemhauser et al., 1978]). Let E be a finite ground set. A set
function F : 2E → R is submodular if for every A ⊆ B ⊆ E and every e ∈ E \ B,
                         F (A ∪ {e}) − F (A) ≥ F (B ∪ {e}) − F (B).                          (B.1)
Equivalently, F is submodular if and only if for every A, B ⊆ E,
                           F (A) + F (B) ≥ F (A ∪ B) + F (A ∩ B).                            (B.2)
The defining property (B.1) is the diminishing-returns condition: the marginal gain of adding element
e to a set does not increase as the set grows. This captures the redundancy that arises in multi-agent


                                                 16
coordination when agents sense overlapping regions, cover intersecting areas, or collect correlated
information.
Definition B.2 (Normalized Monotone Submodular Function [Qu et al., 2019]). A submodular
function F : 2E → R≥0 is:

     (i) normalized if F (∅) = 0;
    (ii) monotone if F (A) ≤ F (B) whenever A ⊆ B.
Definition B.3 (Marginal Gain). The marginal gain of element e ∈ Ωt with respect to set A ⊆ Ωt \{e}
under state st is Ft (e | A; st ) ≜ Ft (A ∪ {e}; st ) − Ft (A; st ).

The stage utility Ft in Problem 1 is assumed to be normalized, monotone, and submodular throughout
the paper.
Definition B.4 (DR Property and DR-Submodular Functions [Bian et al., 2017]). A function f :
X → R defined over a convex domain X ⊆ [0, 1]|Ωt | satisfies the diminishing returns (DR) property
if for all a ≤ b ∈ X , ∀e ∈ Ωt , ∀k ∈ R+ such that (kχe + a) ∈ X and (kχe + b) ∈ X , it holds:
                            f (kχe + a) − f (a) ≥ f (kχe + b) − f (b),                            (B.3)
where χe ∈ {0, 1}|Ωt | is the standard basis vector corresponding to element e ∈ Ωt . Such a function
f (·) is called a DR-submodular function.
Assumption B.1. For each round t, the function Ft : 2Ωt → R≥0 satisfies:

(1) Normalization: Ft (∅) = 0.
(2) Monotonicity: Ft (A; st ) ≤ Ft (B; st ) for all A ⊆ B ⊆ Ωt .
(3) Submodularity: For all A ⊆ B ⊆ Ωt and e ∈ Ωt \ B,
                                      Ft (e | A; st ) ≥ Ft (e | B; st ),                          (B.4)
    where Ft (e | A; st ) ≜ Ft (A ∪ {e}; st ) − Ft (A; st ) is the marginal gain.
(4) Bounded marginals: There exists B < ∞ such that 0 ≤ Ft (e | A; st ) ≤ B for all A ∈ It ,
    e ∈ Ωt , and all st ∈ S.

C    Related Work
Submodular Optimization and Online Learning. Submodular maximization under matroid
constraints is a classic combinatorial optimization framework with provable suboptimality guaran-
tees [Nemhauser et al., 1978, Fisher et al., 2009, Calinescu et al., 2011]. To address non-stationarity,
a growing body of work studies online and bandit submodular optimization, including continuous
relaxations with full-information or bandit feedback [Zhang et al., 2019, 2023, Tajdini et al., 2024].
For diminishing-returns submodular functions, gradient-based methods achieve constant-factor guar-
antees in online regimes [Bian et al., 2017, Hassani et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2025b]. In control
and sensing applications, multilinear extension-based relaxations are used to obtain scalable ap-
proximate solutions with performance guarantees [Kazma and Taha, 2025, Rakhshan et al., 2025].
Concurrent to our work, a policy-based continuous extension structurally analogous to our PME has
been proposed for multi-agent online coordination, extending approximation guarantees to weakly
submodular objectives via consensus-based distributed gradient ascent [Zhang et al., 2025a]; how-
ever, this framework assumes a fixed agent population and targets online regret minimization rather
than sequential decision-making in open systems. More broadly, existing relaxations either rely on
Bernoulli-based multilinear extensions that generate infeasible joint actions under partition matroid
constraints [Calinescu et al., 2011, Zhang et al., 2025b], or optimize continuous surrogates whose
gradient signals are not directly interpretable as per-agent contributions. We address this by proposing
the PME, a continuous relaxation that natively respects partition matroid feasibility.

Submodular Reinforcement Learning and Credit Assignment in MARL. In multi-agent rein-
forcement learning, credit assignment mechanisms such as difference rewards [Wolpert and Tumer,
2002], counterfactual baselines [Foerster et al., 2018], and monotonic value decomposition [Rashid


                                                   17
Table 2: Systematic comparison of submodular optimization, online coordination, and MARL
methods for multi-agent task allocation.
                                                          Req.        Part.   Decent-
Method                                                                                OMAS   Guarantee / Key Limitation
                                                         Comm.        Feas.   ralized
Centralized greedy [Fisher et al., 2009]                  Global       ✓        ✗     ✗      1/2 under general matroids; myopic; requires full state
Continuous greedy + rounding [Calinescu et al., 2011]     Global       ✓        ✗     ✗      (1−1/e); centralized relaxation and rounding
MA-OSMA [Zhang et al., 2025b]                           Consensus      ✓†       ✓     ✗      (1−1/e); high comm. overhead; fixed agents
MA-SPL [Zhang et al., 2025a]                            Consensus      ✓†       ✓     ✗      (1−c/e); weakly submodular; fixed agents
GPO [Chen et al., 2026]                                 Seq. order‡    ✓        ✗     ✗      1/2; tabular MDP; fixed agents; sequential
Standard MARL [Yu et al., 2022]                           Local        ✓        ✓     ✗      No submodular guarantee; fixed agents
Ours (SubMAPG)                                            Local        ✓        ✓     ✓      Stagewise approximation; dynamic regret
 † The continuous relaxation may not match partition-feasible categorical execution; feasibility is restored by rounding or

post-processing.     ‡ Agents are optimized sequentially in a fixed order rather than by simultaneous decentralized execution.




et al., 2020] are widely used to stabilize policy-gradient learning. While effective in practice, these
methods are usually motivated by variance reduction or reward shaping and do not consider the
structure of team’s utility. However, submodular utilities possess a rich structure in connection to
difference rewards. Recent efforts incorporate submodularity into RL, including submodular RL
formulations and greedy-style policy optimization [Prajapat et al., 2024, De Santi et al., 2024], as
well as KL-regularized policy optimization for adaptive submodular maximization [Kveton et al.,
2025]. Independently, cooperative MARL with submodular rewards in tabular MDPs has been studied
via sequential greedy policy optimization, achieving a 1/2-approximation for known dynamics and
sublinear regret for unknown dynamics via UCB-based methods [Chen et al., 2026]; however, this
analysis assumes a fixed agent population and fully observable tabular states, and relies on sequential
agent ordering rather than simultaneous decentralized execution. Meanwhile, recent discussions
highlight that openness and non-stationarity can exacerbate credit misattribution in MARL [Abadi
and Soh, 2025]. Also, policy gradient via difference rewards has been formally analyzed, but with
no connection to continuous relaxations under partition matroid constraints [Castellini et al., 2025].
We advance this literature and show that submodular difference rewards are unbiased stochastic
gradient estimators of the PME, providing a principled bridge between credit assignment in MARL
and continuous DR-submodular optimization under categorical sampling constraints.

Multi-Agent Coordination in Open Environments. Multi-agent problems such as dynamic target
tracking, active sensing, and coverage are often modeled as combinatorial task allocation problems
with diminishing returns [Zhang et al., 2018b, Oliva et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024b]. Standard
formulations consider fixed agent and task sets and centralized solutions via greedy or relaxation-
based methods. Recent work addresses more realistic formulations with time-varying objectives
and online decentralized decision-making, e.g., constrained coverage and sensing [Cerviño et al.,
2025], and online submodular coordination for multi-agent tracking with regret bounds [Xu et al.,
2023, Zhang et al., 2025b]. However, these approaches typically assume a fixed number of agents
throughout execution. Open multi-agent systems (OMAS), where agents and tasks dynamically
arrive and depart, pose additional challenges [Deplano et al., 2026]. Standard MARL algorithms
such as MAPPO [Yu et al., 2022] and MADDPG [Lowe et al., 2017] assume fixed agent sets and
stationary state-action spaces, limiting their direct applicability. Recent OMAS research has explored
distributed consensus, robustness to population changes [Oliva et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2024b], and
graph neural networks (GNNs) for permutation-invariant, variable-sized representations [Jiang et al.,
2020, Xu et al., 2019, Lai et al., 2025]. Yet, existing GNN-based MARL methods provide limited
formal guarantees for combinatorial team objectives. Our work addresses this gap. SubMAPG is built
on PME marginal dynamics with provable approximation and regret bounds for partition-constrained
submodular coordination, while adopting GNNs for scalable implementation in open environments.

C.1      Comparison with Existing Methods

We provide a systematic comparison between the proposed PME and existing approaches for sub-
modular coordination in multi-agent settings. Table 2 summarizes key properties across different
methods.
Simple centralized greedy achieves a 1/2-approximation for monotone submodular maximization
under general matroid constraints, while the (1 − 1/e) guarantee is obtained by continuous greedy
together with rounding schemes [Fisher et al., 2009, Calinescu et al., 2011]. However, they re-


                                                                         18
quire global coordination and instantaneous optimization at each decision step, which limits their
applicability to sequential settings with learned policies.
MLE-based continuous relaxations preserve the (1 − 1/e) guarantee via (often centralized) rounding
schemes [Calinescu et al., 2011, Zhang et al., 2025b]. Importantly, while rounding does restore
feasibility, it is a post-hoc correction: the optimized surrogate is defined under an independent
Bernoulli model, whereas execution in OMAS uses per-agent categorical decisions constrained by
the partition structure. This objective-execution discrepancy is particularly consequential in policy-
gradient and sequential settings, where the learning signal is driven by the surrogate rather than the
actually executed distribution. Moreover, distributed implementations typically rely on consensus
steps to coordinate a shared continuous solution, incurring nontrivial communication overhead.
Standard MARL methods such as MAPPO [Yu et al., 2022] and QMIX [Rashid et al., 2020] support
decentralized execution and can be extended to handle sequential decisions. However, they provide
no formal guarantees for submodular objectives and typically assume fixed agent sets, limiting their
direct applicability to open multi-agent systems.
Our PME-based approach bridges this gap by providing a continuous relaxation that natively respects
partition matroid constraints. While classical centralized greedy enjoys the stronger (1 − 1/e) approx-
imation ratio in static fully observable submodular maximization, it requires global state information
and sequential one-shot optimization at every round. SubMAPG instead targets a different regime:
first-order policy learning with factorized categorical policies, simultaneous decentralized execution,
local observations, and open agent/task sets. The resulting 1/2 factor is the standard guarantee
for first-order methods on monotone DR-submodular functions [Bian et al., 2017, Hassani et al.,
2017]. Thus, the weaker worst-case constant is the price of avoiding centralized rounding or sequen-
tial greedy selection, while gaining compatibility with policy-gradient learning and open-system
execution. Empirically, SubMAPG can match or exceed myopic greedy baselines in cumulative
utility because the learned policy optimizes long-horizon behavior under dynamics, whereas greedy
baselines optimize instantaneous stage utilities.

D     Proofs for Section 3
This appendix provides complete proofs for the theoretical results presented in Section 3.

D.1    Proof of Gradient of PME (Lemma 3.1)

Lemma 3.1 (Gradient of PME). The partial derivative of f˜t with respect to x(i,a) is given by
                           ∂ f˜t                     h                    i
                                  (x) = EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft (i, a) | A−i ; st ,
                          ∂x(i,a)
where A−i denotes a joint action of all agents except agent i, sampled from the product distribution
D−i (x) over Nt \ {i}.

Proof. We derive the gradient by differentiating the PME definition with respect to x(i,a) and carefully
tracking how this variable appears in the probability terms.
Based on Definition 3.1, the PME is defined as:
                                           X             Y
                            f˜t (x; st ) =   Ft (A; st )   pk (A; x),                              (D.1)
                                           A∈It            k∈Nt

where for each agent k ∈ Nt , the inclusion probability is:
                                               if A ∩ Ωk,t = {(k, a′ )} for some a′ ∈ Ak,t ,
                   (
                     x(k,a′ ) ,
       pk (A; x) =       P
                     1 − a′′ ∈Ak,t x(k,a′′ ) , if A ∩ Ωk,t = ∅.

We focus on a specific agent i and action a. The term pi (A; x) depends on x(i,a) in three mutually
exclusive cases:

      (a) If A ∩ Ωi,t = {(i, a)}, then pi (A; x) = x(i,a) . The partial derivative is: ∂p i (A;x)
                                                                                        ∂x(i,a) = 1.


                                                   19
      (b) If A ∩ Ωi,t = {(i, a′ )} for some a′ ̸= a, then pi (A; x) = x(i,a′ ) . This term is independent
          of x(i,a) , so: ∂pi (A;x)
                           ∂x(i,a) = 0.
                                                 P
      (c) If A ∩ Ωi,t = ∅, then pi (A; x) = 1 − a′′ ∈Ai,t x(i,a′′ ) . Since x(i,a) is included in the sum:
          ∂pi (A;x)
           ∂x(i,a) = −1.


Crucially, for any other agent k ̸= i, the probability pk (A; x) does not depend on agent i’s marginals.
Applying the product rule to Eq. (D.1), only terms involving agent i contribute non-zero derivatives:
                                                                               
                          ˜
                       ∂ ft          X                   ∂pi (A; x) Y
                              (x) =        Ft (A; st )                pk (A; x) .
                      ∂x(i,a)                             ∂x(i,a)
                                         A∈It                        k̸=i

Splitting the sum based on the cases above (Case (b) vanishes):
       ∂ f˜t          X                  Y                   X                    Y
             (x) =           Ft (A; st )      pk (A; x) −             Ft (A; st )      pk (A; x) .   (D.2)
     ∂x(i,a)
                   A:(i,a)∈A             k̸=i             A:A∩Ωi,t =∅             k̸=i
                   |               {z                 } |                  {z                  }
                             Case (a): ∂pi /∂x(i,a) =+1           Case (c): ∂pi /∂x(i,a) =−1


Let A−i denote a feasible joint action for all agents except i, drawn from the restricted family It−i .
We observe a one-to-one correspondence:

      1) Any A containing (i, a) can be written as A−i ∪ {(i, a)}.
     2) Any A where i is idle is effectively just A−i .

Furthermore, the product term k̸=i pk (A; x) is exactly the probability of observing A−i under the
                               Q

product distribution D−i (x), denoted as Pr(A−i ; x).
Substituting these into Eq. (D.2):
   ∂ f˜t          X                                                  X
         (x) =            Ft (A−i ∪ {(i, a)}; st ) · Pr(A−i ; x) −           Ft (A−i ; st ) · Pr(A−i ; x)
 ∂x(i,a)
                A−i ∈It−i                                          A−i ∈It−i
                  X                    h                                          i
             =            Pr(A−i ; x) · Ft (A−i ∪ {(i, a)}; st ) − Ft (A−i ; st )
                 A−i ∈It−i
                             h                i
              = EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft (i, a) | A−i ; st .
This completes the proof.

D.2    Properties of the Partition Multilinear Extension

We state and prove the structural properties of the PME that enable gradient-based optimization.
Theorem D.1 (Properties of PME). If Ft satisfies Assumption B.1, then f˜t : P(It ) → R satisfies:

(1) Normalization: f˜t (0) = Ft (∅) = 0.

(2) Non-negativity: f˜t (x; st ) ≥ 0 for all x ∈ P(It ).

(3) Smoothness: f˜t is a multilinear polynomial and infinitely differentiable.
(4) Monotonicity: ∇f˜t (x; st ) ≥ 0 for all x ∈ P(It ).

(5) DR-submodularity: For any x, y ∈ P(It ) with x ≤ y componentwise, ∇f˜t (x; st ) ≥ ∇f˜t (y; st )
    componentwise.

Proof. We prove each property in turn. Properties (1)-(3) follow directly from Definition 3.1, while
properties (4)-(5) additionally rely on the gradient characterization established in Lemma 3.1.


                                                          20
(1) Normalization. When x = 0, we have x(k,a) = 0 for all (k, a) ∈ Ωt . By Definition 3.1, the
probability that agent k contributes to a set A is
                                     (
                                       0, if A ∩ Ωk,t = {(k, a)} for some a,
                         pk (A; 0) =
                                       1, if A ∩ Ωk,t = ∅.
                                                                       Q
Thus pk (A; 0) = 1 if and only if agent k is idle in A. For the product k∈Nt pk (A; 0) to be nonzero,
every agent must be idle, which occurs only when A = ∅. Therefore,
                                  X               Y
                       f˜t (0) =     Ft (A; st )      pk (A; 0) = Ft (∅) · 1 = 0,
                                A∈It             k∈Nt

where the last equality uses the normalization property Ft (∅) = 0.

(2) Non-negativity. Ft (A; st ) ≥ 0 for all A ∈ It . Moreover, for any x ∈ P(It ), each probability
term satisfies pk (A; x) ≥ 0 by definition. Since f˜t (x; st ) is a sum of products of nonnegative terms,
                                         X                   Y
                          f˜t (x; st ) =      Ft (A; st ) ·       pk (A; x) ≥ 0.
                                              | {z }
                                         A∈It     ≥0        k∈N t
                                                            |      {z     }
                                                                 ≥0


(3) Smoothness. By Definition 3.1, we have f˜t (x; st ) = A∈It Ft (A; st ) k∈Nt pk (A; x). For
                                                              P                   Q
each agent k, the term pk (A; x) is an affine function of the variables {x(k,a) }a∈Ak,t :

     (a) If A ∩ Ωk,t = {(k, a)}, then pk (A; x) = x(k,a) (linear in x(k,a) ).
                                                P
     (b) If A ∩ Ωk,t = ∅, then pk (A; x) = 1 − a∈Ak,t x(k,a) (affine).

Since each pQ  k depends only on the variables of agent k and different agents have disjoint variable sets,
the product k∈Nt pk (A; x) is a multilinear polynomial: it has degree at most one in each agent’s
variables, with total degree at most |Nt |. As a finite sum of such products weighted by constants
Ft (A; st ), f˜t (x; st ) is a polynomial in x, which is C ∞ (infinitely differentiable) on R|Ωt | .

(4) Monotonicity of Gradient.       By Lemma 3.1, for any (i, a) ∈ Ωt ,
                             ∂ f˜t                     h                i
                                    (x) = EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft (i, a) | A−i .
                            ∂x(i,a)
By the monotonicity of Ft , the marginal gain is nonnegative:
          Ft (i, a) | A−i = Ft (A−i ∪ {(i, a)}) − Ft (A−i ; st ) ≥ 0,           ∀A−i ∈ It−i .
                           

                                                                                           ˜
Since the expectation of a nonnegative random variable is nonnegative, we have ∂x∂(i,a)
                                                                                   ft
                                                                                        (x) ≥ 0 for
                             ˜
all (i, a) ∈ Ωt , and hence ∇ft (x; st ) ≥ 0 componentwise.

(5) DR-Submodularity. We prove the DR property through the antitonicity of the gradient on P(It ).
Since f˜t is a multilinear polynomial, it is twice continuously differentiable on an open neighborhood
of P(It ). It therefore suffices to show that all second partial derivatives are non-positive on P(It )
and then integrate the Hessian along line segments inside the convex polytope.
We verify the second-order condition by considering two cases.

     (a) Same agent (u = i). By property (3), f˜t is affine in the variables of each individual agent
         subset. Indeed, in every monomial of the PME, at most one factor depends on the variables
         {x(i,a) : a ∈ Ai,t }, and this factor is affine. Therefore, for any fixed agent i, all second-order
         partial derivatives within the same subset vanish:
                                    ∂ 2 f˜t
                                                (x; st ) = 0 ≤ 0,      ∀a, v ∈ Ai,t .
                                ∂x(i,v) ∂x(i,a)

                                                    21
      (b) Different agents (u ̸= i). From Lemma 3.1, for any (i, a) ∈ Ωt ,

                              ∂ f˜t
                                     (x; st ) = EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft ((i, a) | A−i ; st ) .
                                                                                    
                             ∂x(i,a)

          Let A−{i,u} denote a joint action of all agents except i and u, sampled from D−{i,u} (x).
          Conditioning on the contribution of agent u, we can write
                                              "
                   ∂ f˜t                         X
                          (x; st ) = EA−{i,u}          x(u,b) Ft ((i, a) | A−{i,u} ∪ {(u, b)}; st )
                  ∂x(i,a)
                                                b∈Au,t
                                                                                                #
                                                       X
                                                                                     −{i,u}
                                            + 1 −           x(u,b)  Ft ((i, a) | A        ; st ) .
                                                         b∈Au,t

          Since x(u,v) appears linearly, differentiating with respect to x(u,v) gives

              ∂ 2 f˜t                        h                                                                   i
                          (x; st ) = EA−{i,u} Ft ((i, a) | A−{i,u} ∪ {(u, v)}; st ) − Ft ((i, a) | A−{i,u} ; st ) .
          ∂x(u,v) ∂x(i,a)
                                                                                                    (D.3)
          By submodularity of Ft , marginal gains diminish as the conditioning set grows. Since
          A−{i,u} ⊆ A−{i,u} ∪ {(u, v)}, we have

                         Ft ((i, a) | A−{i,u} ∪ {(u, v)}; st ) ≤ Ft ((i, a) | A−{i,u} ; st ).

          Thus the integrand in (D.3) is non-positive. Because x ∈ P(It ) ensures that D−{i,u} (x) is
          a valid product distribution with nonnegative weights, the expectation is also non-positive:

                                                 ∂ 2 f˜t
                                                             (x; st ) ≤ 0.
                                             ∂x(u,v) ∂x(i,a)

Combining the two cases, every second partial derivative of f˜t is non-positive on P(It ). Now take any
x, y ∈ P(It ) with x ≤ y componentwise. Since P(It ) is convex, the segment z(τ ) = x + τ (y − x)
lies in P(It ) for all τ ∈ [0, 1]. For any coordinate (i, a),

       ∂ f˜t             ∂ f˜t                              ∂ 2 f˜t
                                           Z 1 X
                                                                                                      
             (y; st ) −         (x; st ) =                                (z(τ ); st ) y(u,v) − x(u,v) dτ
    ∂x(i,a)             ∂x(i,a)             0          ∂x (u,v) ∂x  (i,a)
                                              (u,v)∈Ωt

                                      ≤ 0,                                                           (D.4)

because each Hessian entry is non-positive and y(u,v) − x(u,v) ≥ 0. Hence ∇f˜t (x; st ) ≥ ∇f˜t (y; st )
componentwise. This is exactly the DR-submodularity property on P(It ).

D.3    Proof of Objective Equivalence (Lemma 3.2)

Lemma 3.2 (Objective Equivalence). Let π = i∈Nt π i be a factorized categorical policy as
                                                             Q

per (1) and define the state-dependent marginal vector xt (st ) by x(i,a) (st ) ≜ π i (a | O(st , i)). Then,
for any fixed state st , the conditional expected stage utility under π equals the PME evaluated at
x(π): EhAt ∼π [Ft (At ; sit ) | st ] = f˜t (xt (st ); st ). Consequently, by the total expectation, Jt (π) =
Est ∼µπt f˜t (xt (st ); st ) , where µπt denotes the marginal state distribution at round t induced by π.
                                       P                                           P
Note that for categorical policies, a x(i,a) (st ) = 1, so the idle mass 1 − a x(i,a) in (4) is exactly
zero, ensuring exact equivalence at every state st .

Proof. Fix a round t and a state st . Conditional on st , each agent i ∈ Nt observes oi,t = O(st , i)
and samples one action independently according to the categorical distribution π i (· | oi,t ). Therefore
the realized joint action set is At = {(i, ai,t ) : i ∈ Nt }, ai,t ∼ π i (· | O(st , i)). Since each active
agent contributes exactly one agent-action pair, we have At ∈ It with probability one.


                                                     22
Consider any feasible set A ∈ It . Under the state-dependent marginal vector xt (st ), the per-agent
factor in the PME is
                                
                                                  i
                                x(i,a) (st ) = π (a | O(st , i)), if A ∩ Ωi,t = {(i, a)},
                                
              pi (A; xt (st )) = 1 −
                                        X
                                              x(i,a′ ) (st ),     if A ∩ Ωi,t = ∅.
                                      ′a ∈Ai,t

Because π i (· | O(st , i)) is a categorical distribution, a′ ∈Ai,t x(i,a′ ) (st ) = 1, so the idle probability
                                                          P

is zero for every active agent. Thus any feasible set that omits an active agent has zero probability
under the categorical execution model, while any feasible set selecting exactly one action per active
agent has probability equal to the product of the corresponding local action probabilities.
Using the conditional independence
                       Q              of agents’ action samples given st , the probability of realizing A
is Pr(At = A | st ) = i∈Nt pi (A; xt (st )). Therefore,
                                                   X
                    EAt ∼π [Ft (At ; st ) | st ] =    Ft (A; st ) Pr(At = A | st )
                                                      A∈It
                                                      X                    Y
                                                  =          Ft (A; st )          pi (A; xt (st ))
                                                      A∈It                 i∈Nt

                                                  = f˜t (xt (st ); st ),                                 (D.5)
where the last equality is exactly the definition of the PME in Definition 3.1. Finally, applying the
law of total expectation over st ∼ µπt gives
                                                                                     h                   i
     Jt (π) = Eπ [Ft (At ; st )] = Est ∼µπt [EAt ∼π [Ft (At ; st ) | st ]] = Est ∼µπt f˜t (xt (st ); st ) .




E     Proofs for Section 4

This appendix provides complete proofs for all theoretical results in Section 4.

E.1     Masked-Softmax Feasibility and Policy Scope

E.1.1    Masked-softmax Feasibility (Lemma E.1)
Lemma    E.1 (Masked-Softmax Feasibility). The masked-softmax policy parameterization (6) satisfies
           i                                 d
P
   a∈Ai,t πθ (a | oi,t ) = 1 for all θ ∈ R , all agents i ∈ Nt , and all observations oi,t ∈ O.
Consequently, the induced marginal vector x(θ) ∈ Ft for all θ, where Ft is the boundary face defined
in (5). Thus, every sampled joint action is feasible under the partition matroid.

Proof. By Definition (6), the policy of agent i is
                                                                       
                                          exp [Wh hi,t ]a + Ma
                   πθi (a | oi,t ) = P                               ,                ∀ a ∈ Ai,t ,      (E.1)
                                      a′ ∈Ai,t exp [Wh hi,t ]a + Ma
                                                              ′    ′



where Ma = 0 for all feasible a ∈ Ai,t and Ma = −∞ for infeasibleP actions (which are excluded
from the sum by convention). Since the denominator is exactly a′ ∈Ai,t exp([Wh hi,t ]a′ + Ma′ ),
the softmax normalization gives
                                         P
                                           a∈Ai,t exp([Wh hi,t ]a + Ma )
                   X
                          i
                        πθ (a | oi,t ) = P                                = 1,            (E.2)
                                          a′ ∈Ai,t exp([Wh hi,t ]a + Ma )
                                                                  ′    ′
                     a∈Ai,t

                d                                                             i
P all θ ∈ R , all i ∈ Nt , and all oi,t ∈ O. Consequently, x(i,a) (θ) ≜ πθ (a | oi,t ) satisfies
for
   a∈Ai,t x(i,a) (θ) = 1 for all i, which by Definition (5) means x(θ) ∈ Ft .


                                                        23
E.1.2    Proof of Proposition E.1
Proposition E.1 (Tabular Softmax Induces Feasible PME-Based Ascent). Let each agent i use a
tabular softmax policy πθi (a | o) = softmax(θo,·
                                              i                                   i
                                                  )a with independent parameters θo,a ∈ R. Consider
                                                  (θ)                (θ)
the policy-gradient update θk+1 = θk + ηĝk , where ĝk is an unbiased estimator of ∇θ Jt (θk )
conditional on θk . Let xk = x(θk ) and ∆xk ≜ xk+1 − xk . Then:

      (i) xk ∈ Ft for all k.
      (ii) For sufficiently small η,
                    hD                   E  i                        2
                 E ∇x f˜t (xk ; st ), ∆xk θk = η J⊤    ˜
                                                  k ∇x ft (xk ; st )   + O(η 2 ) ≥ −O(η 2 ),
                                                                             2

          where Jk = ∂x(θ)/∂θ|θ=θk .

Consequently, tabular softmax gradient ascent preserves feasibility on Ft and produces, to first
order, a PME-based marginal update. The guarantees in Theorems 5.1 and 5.2 are stated for the
idealized Euclidean projected stochastic-gradient dynamics in x-space, rather than for general
parameter-space dynamics.

Proof. Part (i) follows from Lemma E.1: for every θ, each local softmax distribution satisfies
          i
P
  a∈Ai,t πθ (a | oi,t ) = 1, and hence the induced marginal vector lies in Ft .

For part (ii), by Lemma E.2 and the chain rule, ∇θ Jt (θ) = J(θ)⊤ ∇x f˜t (x(θ); st ), where J(θ) =
∂x(θ)/∂θ is the Jacobian of the tabular softmax mapping. For a fixed agent i and observation o, the
softmax Jacobian is Joi = diag(π i ) − π i (π i )⊤ . This matrix is symmetric positive semidefinite and
has range contained in the tangent space of the probability simplex,
                                                                       
                                                           X           
                            T∆(Ai,t ) = z ∈ R|Ai,t | :            za = 0 .
                                                                       
                                                                   a∈Ai,t

It is the covariance matrix of a categorical distribution. In particular, its range property implies that
first-order changes of the marginals remain tangent to the product simplex.
Using a first-order Taylor expansion of the smooth mapping θ → x(θ) around θk , we have ∆xk =
                                              (θ)
Jk (θk+1 −θk )+O(∥θk+1 −θk ∥22 ) = ηJk ĝk +O(η 2 ), where the O(η 2 ) term is uniform on compact
parameter sets, or whenever the relevant second derivatives of the softmax map are bounded along
the update.
                                                      h        i
                                                        (θ)                          ˜
Taking conditional expectation given θk and using E ĝk | θk = ∇θ Jt (θk ) = J⊤k ∇x ft (xk ; st ), we
obtain E[∆xk | θk ] = ηJk Jk ∇x f˜t (xk ; st ) + O(η ). Therefore,
                            ⊤                       2

                          hD                      E     i
                        E ∇x f˜t (xk ; st ), ∆xk θk
                               = η∇x f˜t (xk ; st )⊤ Jk J⊤    ˜                  2
                                                         k ∇x ft (xk ; st ) + O(η )
                                                             2
                               = η J⊤    ˜                       + O(η 2 )
                                    k ∇x ft (xk ; st )
                                                             2
                               ≥ −O(η 2 ),                                                         (E.3)
where the second equality uses v⊤ Jk J⊤       ⊤   2
                                      k v = ∥Jk v∥2
for any vector v. This proves the claimed first-order PME-based ascent property.

E.2     Unbiased PME Gradient Estimation

E.2.1    Proof of Proposition E.2
Proposition E.2 (Unbiased Gradient Estimator). Let x(θ) be the marginal probabilities induced by
πθ . For any agent i and action a ∈ Ai,t , the expected marginal contribution conditioned on agent i


                                                        24
selecting a equals the partial derivative of the PME:
                                                                    ∂ f˜t
                         EA−i ∼π−i Ft ((i, a) | A−i
                                                                             
                                                 t ; st ) =                x(θ) ,                      (E.4)
                             t                                     ∂x(i,a)
                            j
where π −i ≜
               Q
                 j∈Nt \{i} πθ denotes the joint policy of all agents except i.


Proof. The key observation is that the factorized structure of the policy πθ implies conditional
independence: agent i’s action choice does not affect the distribution of other agents’ actions.
Under the factorized policy πθ = k∈Nt πθk , each agent samples its action independently. Let
                                    Q

At = {(k, ak,t ) : k ∈ Nt } denote the joint action and A−i  t = At \ {(i, ai,t )} the joint action of
all agents except i. Since agent i’s action ai,t is sampled independently of other agents’ actions,
conditioning on ai,t = a does not affect the distribution of A−i
                                                               t :
                                                                   Y
                  −i      −i                      −i     −i
             Pr(At = A | ai,t = a) = Pr(At = A ) =                       πθk (ak,t | ok,t ).     (E.5)
                                                                      k∈Nt \{i}


By Lemma 3.2, the marginal probabilities induced by πθ satisfy x(k,a′ ) (θ) = πθk (a′ | ok,t ) for all
k ∈ Nt and a′ ∈ Ak,t . Consequently, the distribution of A−i
                                                           t under π
                                                                     −i
                                                                        is precisely D−i (x(θ)), the
product distribution over agents Nt \ {i} defined in Section 3.1.
Using the conditional independence in (E.5), we have
           EA−i ∼π−i Ft ((i, a) | A−i                                         −i
                                                                               
             t
                                   t ) | ai,t = a = EA−i
                                                       t ∼π
                                                            −i Ft ((i, a) | At )



                                                   = EA−i ∼D−i (x(θ)) Ft ((i, a) | A−i ) .
                                                                                       
                                                                                                       (E.6)

By Lemma 3.1, the right-hand side of (E.6) equals the partial derivative of the PME:
                                                               ∂ f˜t
                      EA−i ∼D−i (x(θ)) Ft ((i, a) | A−i ) =
                                                                         
                                                                      x(θ) .
                                                             ∂x(i,a)
Combining with (E.6) completes the proof.

E.2.2   Proof of Lemma E.2
Lemma E.2 (Policy Gradient via Partition Extension). Let x(i,a) (θ) = πθi (a | oi,t ) denote the
marginal probabilities induced by the policy πθi . The gradient of the expected stage utility Jt (θ) ≜
EAt ∼πθ [Ft (At )] is ∇θ Jt (θ) = ∇θ f˜t (x(θ)).

Proof. The result follows from applying the chain rule to the composition of the PME with the
policy-induced marginals. By Lemma 3.2, the expected stage utility under the factorized policy πθ
equals the PME evaluated at the induced marginals:
                              Jt (θ) = EA ∼π [Ft (At )] = f˜t (x(θ)),
                                             t     θ

where x(θ) ∈ P(It ) is the vector with components x(i,a) (θ) = πθi (a | oi,t ) for all (i, a) ∈ Ωt .
Since Jt (θ) = f˜t (x(θ)) is a composition of the differentiable function f˜t : P(It ) → R (cf. Theo-
rem D.1(3)) with the mapping θ → x(θ), the multivariate chain rule yields
                                             X       ∂ f˜t
                              ∇θ Jt (θ) =                  (x(θ)) · ∇θ x(i,a) (θ).              (E.7)
                                                   ∂x(i,a)
                                          (i,a)∈Ωt
                                                    S
Since the ground set decomposes as Ωt = i∈Nt Ωi,t with Ωi,t = {(i, a) : a ∈ Ai,t }, and
x(i,a) (θ) = πθi (a | oi,t ), we can rewrite (E.7) as
                                     X X            ∂ f˜t
                       ∇θ Jt (θ) =                         (x(θ)) · ∇θ πθi (a | oi,t ).
                                                   ∂x(i,a)
                                     i∈Nt a∈Ai,t

This is precisely ∇θ f˜t (x(θ)), completing the proof.


                                                       25
E.2.3    Unbiased PME Gradient Estimator via Policy Gradient (Lemma 4.1)
Lemma 4.1 (Stagewise Submodular Policy Gradient Estimator).                                    Fix a round t and
state st .       Let x(i,a) (θ) = πθi (a | oi,t ) and define the conditional stage ob-
jective JPt (θ; st )    ≜ EAt ∼πθ [Ft (At ; st ) | st ] = f˜t (x(θ); s           t ).    Then ∇θ Jt (θ; st ) =
                               i                                  −i
EAt ∼πθ       i∈Nt   ∇ θ log πθ  (ai,t | oi,t ) Ft ((i, ai,t ) | At  ; st ) − b i,t   ,  where  bi,t is any term inde-
pendent of ai,t conditional on st , oi,t , and the other agents’ sampled actions.

Proof. Fix a round t and condition on the state st . Then the local observations {oi,t }i∈Nt are fixed
through the observation map, and the only randomness in the conditional stage objective comes from
the factorized categorical policy
                                                  Y
                                  πθ (at | ot ) =     πθi (ai,t | oi,t ).
                                                            i∈Nt

For notational simplicity, we suppress the conditioning on st in intermediate expectations.
By the score-function identity,
                                               X
                       ∇θ Jt (θ; st ) = ∇θ           πθ (at | ot )Ft (At ; st )
                                               at
                                          X
                                      =        πθ (at | ot )∇θ log πθ (at | ot )Ft (At ; st )
                                          at
                                      = EAt ∼πθ [∇θ log πθ (at | ot )Ft (At ; st )] .                          (E.8)
Using the factorization of the joint policy,
                                                            X
                              ∇θ log πθ (at | ot ) =               ∇θ log πθi (ai,t | oi,t ),
                                                            i∈Nt

Thus, (E.8) becomes
                                                 "                                               #
                                                     X
                     ∇θ Jt (θ; st ) = EAt ∼πθ               ∇θ log πθi (ai,t | oi,t )Ft (At ; st )   .         (E.9)
                                                     i∈Nt

For each agent i, decompose the team utility as
                            Ft (At ; st ) = Ft ((i, ai,t ) | A−i              −i
                                                              t ; st ) + Ft (At ; st ).                       (E.10)
We next prove that the second term in (E.10) does not contribute to the expectation in (E.9). Con-
dition on st , oi,t , and the sampled actions of all agents except i, equivalently on A−i t . Under this
conditioning, Ft (A−i  t ; st ) is fixed  and independent    of  ai,t . Hence
                   Eai,t ∼πθi ∇θ log πθ (ai,t | oi,t )Ft (At ; st ) | st , oi,t , A−i
                                           i                  −i
                                                                                       
                                                                                    t
                                              X
                          = Ft (A−i  t ; st )      πθi (a | oi,t )∇θ log πθi (a | oi,t )
                                            a∈Ai,t
                                               X
                          = Ft (A−i
                                 t ; st )            ∇θ πθi (a | oi,t )
                                            a∈Ai,t
                                                 X
                          = Ft (A−i
                                 t ; st )∇θ              πθi (a | oi,t ) = Ft (A−i
                                                                                t ; st )∇θ 1 = 0.             (E.11)
                                                a∈Ai,t

Taking expectation over A−i
                          t gives

                         EAt ∼πθ ∇θ log πθi (ai,t | oi,t )Ft (A−i
                                                                      
                                                               t ; st ) = 0.                                  (E.12)

The same argument applies to any baseline bi,t that is independent of ai,t conditional on st , oi,t , and
A−i
 t . Indeed,

                       Eai,t ∼πθi ∇θ log πθi (ai,t | oi,t )bi,t | st , oi,t , A−i
                                                                                 
                                                                               t
                                     X
                              = bi,t      ∇θ πθi (a | oi,t ) = bi,t ∇θ 1 = 0.                    (E.13)
                                            a∈Ai,t



                                                            26
Substituting the decomposition (E.10) into (E.9), and then applying (E.12) and (E.13), we obtain
                                 "                                                                 #
                                   X
                                     ∇θ log πθi (ai,t | oi,t ) Ft ((i, ai,t ) | A−i
                                                                                                 
        ∇θ Jt (θ; st ) = EAt ∼πθ                                                 t ; st ) − bi,t     .
                                      i∈Nt

This proves the stagewise policy-gradient identity.


F     Proofs for Section 5

This appendix provides complete proofs for all theoretical results in Section 5, beginning with the
two preparatory lemmas (Lemmas E.1 and F.1) that underpin the main approximation and regret
theorems.

F.1     Auxiliary Results for the Main Guarantees

F.1.1    Stochastic Gradient Properties (Lemma F.1)

Lemma F.1 (Idealized Projected Stochastic Gradient Properties). Under Assumption B.1, de-
fine the full-information difference-reward estimator gt ∈ R|Ωt | by (gt )(i,a) ≜ Ft ((i, a) |
A−i
  t ; st ),     ∀(i, a) ∈ Ωt , where A−i
                                      t    ∼ D−i (xt ). Then it satisfies, for all t ∈ [T ], x ∈ Ft ,
and st ∈ S:

      (i) Bounded gradient: ∥∇x f˜t (x; st )∥2 ≤ B Nmax Nmax
                                                  p
                                                            a    ≜ G;

      (ii) Unbiased estimation: E[gt | xt , st ] = ∇x f˜t (xt ; st );

      (iii) Bounded variance: E[∥gt − ∇x f˜t (xt ; st )∥22 | xt , st ] ≤ Nmax Nmax
                                                                               a
                                                                                   B 2 ≜ σ2 .


Proof. We prove each property in turn.

(i) Bounded gradient.       By Lemma 3.1, the partial derivative of the PME satisfies

                          ∂ f˜t
                                 (x; st ) = EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft (i, a) | A−i ; st .
                                                                             
                                                                                                          (F.1)
                         ∂x(i,a)

By Assumption B.1(4), the marginal gain satisfies 0 ≤ Ft (e | A; st ) ≤ B for all A ∈ It , e ∈ Ωt ,
                                                                f˜t
and all st ∈ S. Hence each partial derivative satisfies 0 ≤ ∂x∂(i,a) ≤ B uniformly. Summing over all
(i, a) ∈ Ωt :
                                                        !2
                                X X            ∂ f˜t
        ∥∇x f˜t (x; st )∥22 =                                ≤ |Nt | · |Ai,t | · B 2 ≤ Nmax Nmax
                                                                                             a
                                                                                                 B2,      (F.2)
                                              ∂x(i,a)
                                i∈Nt a∈Ai,t


so ∥∇x f˜t (x; st )∥2 ≤ B
                            p
                                   a
                             Nmax Nmax ≜ G.

(ii) Unbiased estimation. The estimator is defined as (gt )(i,a) = Ft ((i, a) | A−i
                                                                                 t ; st ), where
A−i
  t   ∼ D −i
             (x t ). By Proposition E.2, for any action a ∈ A i,t ,

                                                                                     ∂ f˜t
            E (gt )(i,a) | xt , st = EA−i ∼D−i (xt ) Ft ((i, a) | A−i
                                                                        
                                                                   t ; st ) =               (xt ; st ).   (F.3)
                                          t                                         ∂x(i,a)

Since this holds for every coordinate (i, a), we obtain E[gt | xt , st ] = ∇x f˜t (xt ; st ).


                                                         27
(iii) Bounded variance. We bound the mean squared error using the identity ∥u∥22 = (i,a) u2(i,a) ,
                                                                                                    P

which requires no independence assumption across coordinates:
                                                                                         !2           
           h                                    i      X                           ∂  f˜t
          E ∥gt − ∇x f˜t (xt ; st )∥22 | xt , st =           E (gt )(i,a) −                 | xt , st 
                                                                                  ∂x(i,a)
                                                    (i,a)∈Ωt
                                                       X      h                      i
                                                  ≤          E (gt )2(i,a) | xt , st
                                                   (i,a)∈Ωt
                                                     X
                                               ≤              B 2 ≤ Nmax Nmax
                                                                          a
                                                                              B 2 ≜ σ2 ,              (F.4)
                                                   (i,a)∈Ωt

where the first inequality uses Var[X] ≤ E[X 2 ] for nonnegative X, and the second uses (gt )(i,a) ∈
[0, B].

F.1.2     DR-Submodularity on Boundary Face (Lemma F.2)
Lemma F.2 (Restricted DR First-Order Inequality on the Categorical Face). Let Ft be the categorical-
policy face of the partition matroid polytope. Then:

        (i) Ft is a convex polytope and a face of P(It ).
     (ii) For any x, y ∈ Ft ,
                                1˜                             1D ˜                 E
                                  ft (y; st ) − f˜t (x; st ) ≤   ∇ft (x; st ), y − x .                (F.5)
                                2                              2

    (iii) The global maximum of f˜t over P(It ) is attained on Ft . Consequently,
                                 max f˜t (x; st ) = max f˜t (x; st ) ≥ OPTt (st ).                    (F.6)
                                 x∈Ft              x∈P(It )



            P polytope P(It ) is defined by the box constraints 0 ≤ x(i,a) ≤ 1 and the partition
Proof. (i) The
constraints a∈Ai,t x(i,a) ≤ 1 for all i ∈ Nt . For each agent i, the affine hyperplane
                                                               
                                               X               
                                 Hi ≜ x :            x(i,a) = 1
                                                               
                                                   a∈Ai,t


P a supporting hyperplane of P(It ), because it is the tight form of the valid inequality
is
   a∈Ai,t x(i,a) ≤ 1. Therefore,
                                                \
                                 Ft = P(It ) ∩     Hi
                                                            i∈Nt

is a face of P(It ). Since it is an intersection of a polytope with affine hyperplanes, it is also a convex
polytope.
(ii) We prove the restricted first-order inequality directly on the categorical face. This avoids relying
on a lattice argument over the full hypercube, which may not preserve the partition constraints.
Fix any x, y ∈ Ft . Let A ∼ D(x) and Y ∼ D(y) be independent categorical joint-action sets. Since
x, y ∈ Ft , both A and Y select exactly one action from each active agent subset almost surely. Define
A = {ei : i ∈ Nt }, Y = {ui : i ∈ Nt }, where ei , ui ∈ Ωi,t are the selected agent-action pairs of
agent i, and A−i = A \ {ei }.
We first establish the following deterministic inequality for any two such feasible sets A and Y :
                                              X
                                                 Ft (ui | A−i ; st ) − Ft (ei | A−i ; st ) .
                                                                                          
                Ft (Y ; st ) − 2Ft (A; st ) ≤                                                    (F.7)
                                            i∈Nt


To prove (F.7), we use two consequences of monotonicity and submodularity. First, by monotonicity,
Ft (Y ; st )−Ft (A; st ) ≤ Ft (A∪Y ; st )−Ft (A; st ), and add to A only those elements of Y that are not


                                                     28
already in A in an arbitrary order. By submodularity, the total gain is at most the sum of their marginal
gains with respect to A. For any i with ui ∈     / A, we have ui ∈/ A−i and A−i ⊆ A, so diminishing
returns gives Ft (ui | A; st ) ≤ Ft (ui | A−i ; st ). For any i with ui ∈ A, the corresponding gain in
Ft (A ∪ Y ; st ) − Ft (A; st ) is zero and is also bounded by Ft (ui | A−i ; st ) ≥ 0. Hence
                                                          X
                             Ft (Y ; st ) − Ft (A; st ) ≤   Ft (ui | A−i ; st ).                    (F.8)
                                                                 i∈Nt


Second, for any ordering of the elements {ei }i∈Nt , submodularity gives
                                 X
                                     Ft (ei | A−i ; st ) ≤ Ft (A; st ).                                       (F.9)
                                     i∈Nt

Let A = {e1 , . . . , em } under an arbitrary ordering and define Si−1 = {e1 , . . . , ei−1 }. Since
Si−1 ⊆ A−i and ei ∈     / A−i , diminishing returns implies Ft (ei | A−i ; st ) ≤ Ft (ei | Si−1 ; st ).
Summing over i gives
         m
         X                           m
                                     X
                         −i
               Ft (ei | A ; st ) ≤         Ft (ei | Si−1 ; st ) = Ft (A; st ) − Ft (∅; st ) = Ft (A; st ),
         i=1                         i=1

where the last equality uses normalization.
Combining (F.8) and (F.9), we obtain
                                                                         
                 Ft (Y ; st ) − 2Ft (A; st ) = Ft (Y ; st ) − Ft (A; st ) − Ft (A; st )
                                               X
                                             ≤     Ft (ui | A−i ; st ) − Ft (A; st )
                                                   i∈Nt
                                                   X
                                                     Ft (ui | A−i ; st ) − Ft (ei | A−i ; st ) ,
                                                                                              
                                               ≤                                                             (F.10)
                                                   i∈Nt

which proves (F.7).
Then take expectations over the independent samples A ∼ D(x) and Y ∼ D(y). The left-hand side
becomes E[Ft (Y ; st )] − 2E[Ft (A; st )] = f˜t (y; st ) − 2f˜t (x; st ). For the first term on the right-hand
side of (F.7), using the independence of Y and A and Lemma 3.1, we have
            "                         #
              X                          X X
                   Ft (ui | A−i ; st ) =              y(i,a) EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft ((i, a) | A−i ; st )
                                                                                                    
         E
               i∈Nt                            i∈Nt a∈Ai,t
                                               X X                     ∂ f˜t
                                           =                 y(i,a)           (x; st ).                      (F.11)
                                                                      ∂x(i,a)
                                               i∈Nt a∈Ai,t

Similarly, because ei is sampled according to x(i,·) and is independent of A−i ,
           "                      #
             X                        X X
                           −i
                                                  x(i,a) EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft ((i, a) | A−i ; st )
                                                                                             
         E       Ft (ei | A ; st ) =
               i∈Nt                            i∈Nt a∈Ai,t
                                               X X                     ∂ f˜t
                                           =                 x(i,a)           (x; st ).                      (F.12)
                                                                      ∂x(i,a)
                                               i∈Nt a∈Ai,t

Taking expectations in (F.7) and using (F.11)–(F.12), we obtain
                                                        D                    E
                          f˜t (y; st ) − 2f˜t (x; st ) ≤ ∇f˜t (x; st ), y − x .

Dividing both sides by 2 proves (F.5).
(iii) Let x∗ ∈ arg maxx∈P(It ) f˜t (x; st ) be a global maximizer over the full partition matroid polytope.
If x∗ ∈ Ft , there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, there exists an agent i with positive idle mass
                                                    X
                                       ρi ≜ 1 −          x∗(i,a) > 0.
                                                          a∈Ai,t


                                                            29
Choose any action ai ∈ Ai,t and define x′ = x∗ + ρi e(i,ai ) . Then x′ ∈ P(It ), because the i-th
partition constraint becomes tight and no other subset is changed. By monotonicity of f˜t on P(It ),
f˜t (x′ ; st ) ≥ f˜t (x∗ ; st ). Repeating this operation for every agent subset with positive idle mass yields
a point x̄ ∈ Ft such that f˜t (x̄; st ) ≥ f˜t (x∗ ; st ). Since x∗ is already a global maximizer over P(It )
and x̄ ∈ P(It ), we must have equality: f˜t (x̄; st ) = f˜t (x∗ ; st ). Therefore, a global maximizer over
P(It ) is attained on Ft , and hence maxx∈Ft f˜t (x; st ) = maxx∈P(It ) f˜t (x; st ).
It remains to relate this continuous optimum to the discrete optimum.                             Let A∗t ∈
                                ∗
arg maxA∈It Ft (A; st ). If At does not select an action for some active agent, monotonicity of
Ft allows us to add an arbitrary action from that agent’s action set without decreasing the value.
Repeating this for all omitted active agents gives a feasible set Ā∗t ∈ It that selects exactly one action
per active agent and satisfies Ft (Ā∗t ; st ) ≥ Ft (A∗t ; st ) = OPTt (st ). The indicator vector 1Ā∗t lies in
Ft , and by the definition of the PME at deterministic vertices, f˜t (1Ā∗t ; st ) = Ft (Ā∗t ; st ). Therefore,

                       max f˜t (x; st ) ≥ f˜t (1Ā∗t ; st ) = Ft (Ā∗t ; st ) ≥ OPTt (st ).
                       x∈Ft

This proves (F.6).

F.1.3    Pointwise-to-Expected Gap (Lemma F.3)
Lemma F.3 (Pointwise-to-Expected DR-submodular Gap). Suppose that, for every st ∈ S, the
restricted DR-submodular gap inequality in Lemma F.2(ii) holds on Ft . Let x(·), y(·) : S → Ft be
measurable selectors, and let µ be any probability measure over S. Then
   1˜                                         1D                                       E
     ft (y(st ); st ) − f˜t (x(st ); st ) ≤       ∇x f˜t (x(st ); st ), y(st ) − x(st ) , ∀ st ∈ S. (F.13)
   2                                          2
Consequently,
                             1        h                i           h              i
                               Est ∼µ f˜t (y(st ); st ) − Est ∼µ f˜t (x(st ); st )
                             2                                                                      (F.14)
                                    1        hD                                     Ei
                                ≤ Est ∼µ ∇x f˜t (x(st ); st ), y(st ) − x(st ) .
                                    2
In particular, the result applies to µ = µπt , to a state-dependent marginal iterate xt (st ), and to any
measurable optimal selector x∗t (st ) ∈ arg maxz∈Ft f˜t (z; st ).

Proof. For each fixed st ∈ S, Lemma F.2(ii) applies to the two feasible points x(st ), y(st ) ∈ Ft ,
yielding (F.13). Taking expectations with respect to any probability measure µ over S preserves the
inequality and gives (F.14). The measure µ may be policy-induced, and the feasible selectors x(·)
and y(·) may depend on the realized state; the inequality is applied pointwise before integration. If an
exact measurable maximizer is not selected, the same argument applies to any measurable ϵ-optimal
selector, and the result follows by letting ϵ → 0.

F.2     Stagewise Approximation

Theorem 5.1 (Stagewise Approximation). Consider the projected stochastic gradient
                                                                         p        ascent iterates
on Ft : xk+1 = ΠFt (xk + ηgk ), where gk satisfies Lemma F.1. Let η = D/ K(G2 + σ 2 ), where
D = maxx,y∈Ft ∥x − y∥2 . Under Assumption B.1 and Lemma F.2,
                       K−1                                     √
                     1 X h˜                i 1              D G2 + σ 2
                            E ft (xk ; st ) ≥ OPTt (st ) −        √      .                    (9)
                     K                        2                 2 K
                        k=0

Consequently, if k ∗ is sampled uniformly from {0, . . . , K − 1} and πk∗ is the factorized categorical
policy with marginal vector xk∗ , then E[EAt ∼πk∗[Ft (At ; st )]] ≥ 21 OPTt (st ) − D(G+σ)
                                                                                       √
                                                                                      2 K
                                                                                            . The outer
expectation is over the random choice of k ∗ and the stochastic gradient iterates.

Proof. By DR-submodularity of f˜t on Ft (Lemma F.2(ii)), for any x, x∗ ∈ Ft :
                  1˜ ∗                            1D ˜                  E
                    ft (x ; st ) − f˜t (x; st ) ≤   ∇ft (x; st ), x∗ − x .                              (F.15)
                  2                               2

                                                       30
Let x∗ ∈ arg maxx∈Ft f˜t (x; st ). By non-expansiveness of projection, the standard online gradient
descent bound gives [Zinkevich, 2003]:
                         K−1                                         K−1
                         X                         ∥x0 − x∗ ∥22   η X
                               ⟨gk , x∗ − xk ⟩ ≤                +     ∥gk ∥22 .
                                                       2η         2
                         k=0                                         k=0

Taking expectations, using unbiasedness E[gk | xk ] = ∇f˜t (xk ; st ) (Lemma F.1(ii)), the diameter
bound ∥x0 − x∗ ∥22 ≤ D2 , and the second-moment bound E[∥gk ∥22 ] ≤ G2 + σ 2 (Lemma F.1(i,iii)):
                      K−1
                      X      h                           i  D2   ηK(G2 + σ 2 )
                            E ⟨∇f˜t (xk ; st ), x∗ − xk ⟩ ≤    +               .                    (F.16)
                                                            2η       2
                      k=0

Summing (F.15) over k = 0, . . . , K − 1, taking expectations, and applying (F.16):
                                K−1
                                                        1 D2       ηK(G2 + σ 2 )
                                                                                
              K ˜ ∗              X
                                        ˜
                ft (x ; st ) −       E[ft (xk ; st )] ≤         +                   .
              2                                         2 2η             2
                                   k=0

Dividing by K:
                                         K−1
                     1˜ ∗             1 X ˜                  D2   η(G2 + σ 2 )
                       ft (x ; st ) −    E[ft (xk ; st )] ≤     +              .
                     2                K                     4ηK       4
                                         k=0
                 p
Setting η = D/       K(G2 + σ 2 ) gives
                                                        √
                                   D2   η(G2 + σ 2 )   D G2 + σ 2
                                      +              =    √       .
                                  4ηK       4            2 K
Since f˜t (x∗ ; st ) ≥ OPTt (st ) by Lemma F.2(iii), we obtain (9). Since each xk ∈ Ft is the marginal
vector of a factorized categorical policy πk , Lemma 3.2 gives EAt ∼πk [Ft (At ; st )] = f˜t (xk ; st ) for
every k. Let k ∗ be drawn uniformly from {0, . . . , K − 1} independently of the iterates. Then
                                         K−1                                      √
                                       1 X h˜                i 1                D G2 + σ 2
          E[EAt ∼πk∗[Ft (At ; st )]] =        E ft (xk ; st ) ≥ OPTt (st ) −          √        ,
                                       K                         2                  2 K
                                         k=0

completing the proof.

F.3   Dynamic Regret Bound

Theorem 5.2 (Dynamic Regret Bound). Suppose Ft (·; st ) satisfies Assumption B.1 for all t ∈ [T ].
Then f˜t (·; st ) is nonnegative, monotone, and DR-submodular on the partition matroid polytope
P(It ). Since Ft ⊆ P(It ), the first-order gap inequality in Lemma F.2(ii) applies to all x, y ∈
Ft . Let {xt }Tt=1 denote the feasible PME marginal sequence evaluated at the realized states and
generated by the two-step projected stochastic-gradient dynamics x̄t+1 = ΠFt (xt + ηgt ), and
xt+1 = ΠFt+1 (x̄t+1 ). Here gt is a stochastic PME gradient estimator satisfying Lemma F.1, and
η > 0 is constant. Then
                           h                 i D2     DPT   ηT (G2 + σ 2 )
                                     1/2
                          E RegretT (π) ≤           +     +                .                  (11)
                                                 4η    2η        4
                          q
Moreover, setting η ∗ = D(D+2P         T)
                              T (G2 +σ 2 ) gives
                          h           i 1p
                                 1/2
                         E RegretT (π) ≤   D(D + 2PT ) T (G2 + σ 2 ).                                 (12)
                                         2

Proof. We combine the restricted DR-submodular first-order gap inequality with projected stochastic-
gradient analysis over time-varying feasible faces. The first projection is onto the current feasible
face Ft , which allows the standard projection inequality to be applied with the current comparator
x∗t ∈ Ft . The second projection onto Ft+1 maintains feasibility after the feasible face changes.


                                                    31
We embed all time-varying marginal vectors into the common Euclidean space Rdmax with dmax =
Nmax Nmaxa
              using the isometric zero-padding map ιt : Ft → Rdmax . The gradient is extended by
zeros on padded coordinates, so inner products and norms on the active coordinates are preserved.
Define xt , x̄t+1 , and x∗t for their embedded images and suppress ιt from the notation. All projections,
distances, and inner products below are understood in this common embedded Euclidean space. The
embedded diameter is D = maxt,u∈[T ] maxx∈ιt (Ft ), y∈ιu (Fu ) ∥x − y∥2 . For each realized state st ,
let x∗t ∈ arg maxx∈Ft f˜t (x; st ). By Lemma F.2(ii), for xt , x∗t ∈ Ft ,
                          1˜ ∗                               1D ˜                      E
                            ft (xt ; st ) − f˜t (xt ; st ) ≤   ∇ft (xt ; st ), x∗t − xt .
                          2                                  2
Moreover, Lemma F.2(iii) gives f˜t (x∗t ; st ) ≥ OPTt (st ). Therefore,
                   1                                1D ˜                        E
                     OPTt (st ) − f˜t (xt ; st ) ≤      ∇ft (xt ; st ), x∗t − xt .
                   2                                2
Taking expectations over the trajectory randomness and using Lemma 3.2, we obtain
            1                                             1 hD                        Ei
              Est ∼µπt [OPTt (st )] − Eπ [Ft (At ; st )] ≤ E ∇f˜t (xt ; st ), x∗t − xt .                         (F.17)
            2                                             2

Next, consider the first projection step x̄t+1 = ΠFt (xt + ηgt ). Since x∗t ∈ Ft , the Euclidean
                                          2                    2
projection inequality gives ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t ∥2 ≤ ∥xt + ηgt − x∗t ∥2 . Expanding the right-hand side and
rearranging yields
                                                    ∥xt − x∗t ∥22 − ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t ∥22  η
                          ⟨gt , x∗t − xt ⟩ ≤                                         + ∥gt ∥22 .                 (F.18)
                                                                  2η                  2
Conditioning on the history and the realized state st , the comparator x∗t is fixed and Lemma F.1 gives
E[gt | xt , st ] = ∇f˜t (xt ; st ), E[∥gt ∥22 ] ≤ G2 + σ 2 . Taking expectations in (F.18) gives
          hD                               Ei       E∥xt − x∗t ∥22 − E∥x̄t+1 − x∗t ∥22  η
      E        ∇f˜t (xt ; st ), x∗t − xt        ≤                                      + (G2 + σ 2 ).            (F.19)
                                                                   2η                   2

Combining (F.17) and (F.19), and summing over t = 1, . . . , T , gives
                          T
       h
              1/2
                   i   1 X                                      ηT 2
      E RegretT (π) ≤        E∥xt − x∗t ∥22 − E∥x̄t+1 − x∗t ∥22 +   (G + σ 2 ).                                  (F.20)
                      4η t=1                                      4

It remains to control the telescoping term with the time-varying comparator. Define Φt (x) ≜
∥x − x∗t ∥22 . Then
    T
    X                                                                    T
                                                                         X −1
          (Φt (xt ) − Φt (x̄t+1 )) = Φ1 (x1 ) − ΦT (x̄T +1 ) +                  (Φt+1 (xt+1 ) − Φt (x̄t+1 )) .   (F.21)
    t=1                                                                  t=1

Here x̄T +1 is the auxiliary point produced by the final current-face projection. Since Φ1 (x1 ) ≤ D2
and ΦT (x̄T +1 ) ≥ 0, it remains to bound the drift term.
For each t < T , the second projection step is xt+1 = ΠFt+1 (x̄t+1 ). Since x∗t+1 ∈ Ft+1 , non-
expansiveness of Euclidean projection gives ∥xt+1 − x∗t+1 ∥2 ≤ ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t+1 ∥2 . Therefore,

                        Φt+1 (xt+1 ) − Φt (x̄t+1 ) = ∥xt+1 − x∗t+1 ∥22 − ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t ∥22
                                                          ≤ ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t+1 ∥22 − ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t ∥22
                                                          = x∗t − x∗t+1 , 2x̄t+1 − x∗t+1 − x∗t
                                                          ≤ 2D∥x∗t − x∗t+1 ∥2 .                                  (F.22)
The last inequality uses Cauchy–Schwarz and the embedded diameter bound:
                      2x̄t+1 − x∗t+1 − x∗t 2 ≤ ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t+1 ∥2 + ∥x̄t+1 − x∗t ∥2 ≤ 2D.


                                                               32
Taking expectations and using the definition of the expected path length,
                                           "T −1               #
                                            X
                                                    ∗    ∗
                                 PT = E          ∥xt − xt+1 ∥2 ,
                                                         t=1

we obtain from (F.21) and (F.22)
                           " T                           #
                             X
                         E       (Φt (xt ) − Φt (x̄t+1 )) ≤ D2 + 2DPT .                        (F.23)
                                  t=1

Substituting (F.23) into (F.20) gives
                          h            i D2 + 2DP       ηT 2
                                   1/2              T
                        E RegretT (π) ≤               +      (G + σ 2 )
                                              4η          4
                                          D2   DPT      ηT 2
                                        =    +        +     (G + σ 2 ),
                                          4η     2η      4
which proves (11).
                                                     2     2
Finally, define C1 ≜ D(D+2P
                        4
                           T)
                              , C2 ≜ T (G 4+σ ) . Then (11) becomes
                                 h               i C
                                         1/2           1
                                E RegretT (π) ≤          + C2 η.
                                                      η
The minimizing constant step size is
                                                r              s
                                         ∗          C1              D(D + 2PT )
                                        η =            =                          .
                                                    C2              T (G2 + σ 2 )
Substituting η ∗ gives
                    h
                          1/2
                                 i    p     1p
                  E RegretT (π) ≤ 2 C1 C2 =    D(D + 2PT ) T (G2 + σ 2 ).
                                            2
This proves (12) and completes the proof.

F.4     Explicit Bounds and Sublinear Regret

F.4.1    Explicit Parameter Bounds
                                                          a
                                              p t |Nt |, Nmax = maxt,ip
Proposition F.1 (Explicit Bounds). Let Nmax = max
                              √
                                                                      |Ai,t |, and let B bound
                                                        a
the marginal gains. Then D ≤ 2Nmax , G ≤ B Nmax Nmax , and σ ≤ B Nmax Nmax       a , yielding
                       h             i                               
                               1/2
                                                  p
                     E RegretT (π) = O BNmax Nmax      a T · (1 + P ) .                  (F.24)
                                                                   T


Proof. We derive explicit bounds for each constant in terms of the problem dimensions.
                                √
(1) Diameter bound D ≤              2Nmax . The partition matroid polytope decomposes as a Cartesian
product over agents:
                                                                                     
                        Y                                                X           
             P(It ) =          ∆i ,     where   ∆i = xi ∈ [0, 1]|Ai,t | :   x(i,a) ≤ 1 .
                                                                                     
                        i∈Nt                                                          a∈Ai,t

The diameter of each simplex ∆i is achieved between two vertices, e.g., ea and ea′ (unit  √ vectors
corresponding to deterministic action choices): maxxi ,yi ∈∆i ∥xi − yi ∥2 = ∥ea − ea′ ∥2 = 2. Since
the overall polytope is a Cartesian product, the squared diameter is the sum of squared per-agent
diameters:                                          X
                      Dt2 = max ∥x − y∥22 =               2 = 2|Nt | ≤ 2Nmax .
                                 x,y∈P(It )
                                                                    i∈Nt
                                 √
Therefore, D ≜ maxt Dt ≤              2Nmax .


                                                               33
                            p
(2) Gradient bound G ≤ B Nmax Nmax     a . By Lemma 3.1, the partial derivative of the PME
satisfies
                    ∂ f˜t
                           (x; st ) = EA−i ∼D−i (x) Ft (i, a) | A−i ; st .
                                                                       
                   ∂x(i,a)
By Assumption B.1(4), the marginal gain satisfies 0 ≤ Ft (e | A; st ) ≤ B for all A ∈ It , e ∈ Ωt ,
                                                                     f˜t
and all st ∈ S. Therefore, each partial derivative satisfies 0 ≤ ∂x∂(i,a) (x; st ) ≤ B uniformly over
st ∈ S. The gradient norm is thus bounded uniformly:
                                                         !2
             ˜
                            X X            ∂ f˜t                         a
                        2
          ∥∇ft (x; st )∥2 =                      (x; st )    ≤ Nmax Nmax     B 2 , ∀ st ∈ S.
                                         ∂x(i,a)
                              i∈Nt a∈Ai,t

Therefore,
                      G ≜ max max sup ∥∇f˜t (x; st )∥2 ≤ B
                                                                       p
                                                                              a .
                                                                        Nmax Nmax
                                t   x∈Ft st ∈S


                                                                                                       −i
                              p
(3) Variance bound σ ≤ B Nmax Nmax         a . By Proposition E.2, (g )
                                                                               t (i,a) = Ft ((i, a) | At ; st )
is an unbiased estimate of ∂ f˜t /∂x(i,a) , with (gt )(i,a) ∈ [0, B]. We bound the mean squared error
directly using the identity ∥u∥2 = (i,a) u2(i,a) , which requires no independence assumption:
                                    P

                                                                                     !2      
                 h                        i       X                            ∂ f˜t
               E ∥gt − ∇f˜t (xt )∥22 | xt =              E (gt )(i,a) −                 | xt 
                                                                              ∂x(i,a)
                                               (i,a)∈Ωt
                                                  X       h                 i
                                            ≤            E (gt )2(i,a) | xt
                                                 (i,a)∈Ωt
                                                   X
                                             ≤              B 2 ≤ Nmax Nmax
                                                                        a
                                                                            B2,
                                                 (i,a)∈Ωt

where the first inequality uses Var[X] ≤ E[X 2 ] for nonnegative X, and the second uses the bound
(gt )(i,a) ∈ [0, B].
                                                            √               p
                                                                                   a , σ ≤
(4) Explicit regret bound. Substituting the bounds D ≤ 2Nmax , G ≤ B Nmax Nmax
                                                             p
                into Theorem 5.2 with optimal step size η ∗ = D(D + 2PT )/[T (G2 + σ 2 )]:
  p
B Nmax Nmax  a

                 h            i                               
                        1/2
                                                 p
               E RegretT (π) = O (D + PT ) T (G2 + σ 2 )
                                     p                √       p           
                                =O        Nmax + PT · T · B Nmax Nmax     a
                                             p                 p             
                                = O BNmax Nmax     a T + BP       N    N a T
                                                              T     max max
                                             p                   
                                = O BNmax Nmax     a T · (1 + P ) .
                                                                T

This completes the proof.

F.4.2   Sublinear Regret (Corollary 5.1)
Corollary 5.1 (Sublinear Regret). If D, G, and   h σ are uniformly
                                                              i     bounded and the path
                                              1          1/2
length satisfies PT = o(T ), then lim supT →∞ T E RegretT (π) ≤ 0. Equivalently, the pol-
                                                             PT
icy is asymptotically 1/2-optimal on average: lim inf T →∞ T1 t=1 Eπ [Ft (At ; st )] ≥ 21 ·
                PT
lim inf T →∞ T1 t=1 Est ∼µπt [OPTt (st )].

Proof. By Theorem 5.2 with the optimized constant step size
                                         s
                                           D(D + 2PT )
                                   η∗ =                   ,
                                            T (G2 + σ 2 )

                                                     34
we have                  h           i 1p
                               1/2
                       E RegretT (π) ≤     D(D + 2PT ) T (G2 + σ 2 ).
                                       2
Dividing both sides by T gives
                                           r
                       1 h            i 1 D(D + 2P )(G2 + σ 2 )
                                 1/2                  T
                         E RegretT (π) ≤                             .
                       T                 2            T
Since D, G, and σ are uniformly bounded, there exists a constant C > 0, independent of T , such that
                                                         r
                               1 h        1/2
                                                 i         1 + PT
                                 E RegretT (π) ≤ C                 .                          (F.25)
                              T                               T
The condition PT = o(T ) implies 1+P T
                                       T
                                         → 0. Hence the right-hand side of (F.25) converges to zero,
and therefore
                                         1 h        1/2
                                                           i
                                lim sup E RegretT (π) ≤ 0.                                   (F.26)
                                  T →∞ T
This shows that the average dynamic 1/2-regret has a vanishing upper bound.
It remains to derive the average-performance statement. By Definition 5.2,
                                      T                                              
                 h
                          1/2
                                i X       1
               E RegretT (π) =              Est ∼µπt [OPTt (st )] − Eπ [Ft (At ; st )] .
                                     t=1
                                          2

Rearranging and dividing by T yields
               T                           T
            1X                          1 X                          1 h      1/2
                                                                                   i
                  Eπ [Ft (At ; st )] =        Est ∼µπt [OPTt (st )] − E RegretT (π) .
            T t=1                      2T t=1                        T

Taking lim inf on both sides and using lim inf T (aT − bT ) ≥ lim inf T aT − lim supT bT , we obtain
                         T
                   1X
              lim inf    Eπ [Ft (At ; st )]
              T →∞ T
                     t=1
                                T
                     1         1X                                1 h      1/2
                                                                               i
                 ≥     lim inf    Est ∼µπt [OPTt (st )] − lim sup E RegretT (π)
                     2 T →∞ T t=1                           T →∞ T

                            T
                  1        1X
                 ≥ lim inf    Es ∼µπ [OPTt (st )] ,
                  2 T →∞ T t=1 t t

where the last inequality follows from (F.26). This proves the claimed asymptotic 1/2-optimality on
average.

G     Algorithm
G.1   Policy Architecture

We introduce two policy architectures that implement the PME and satisfy the partition matroid
constraint. Both output a factorized categorical policy via a masked softmax, ensuring each agent
cannot select more than one action. SubMAPG-G employs a Graph Neural Network (GNN) encoder.
It is permutation-invariant and accommodates variable numbers of agents and tasks, making it suitable
for open environments. SubMAPG-M employs a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) encoder with a
fixed-dimensional input, offering an efficient alternative for scenarios with fixed agent sets. The
architectures adhere to two principles derived from our theoretical framework:

Categorical Policy for Matroid Constraints. The partition matroid constraint requires mutual
exclusion within each agent’s action set: each agent must select exactly one action. Standard indepen-
dent Bernoulli relaxations violate this constraint by permitting infeasible multi-action assignments
with positive probability. We enforce feasibility via a factorized categorical policy with masked


                                                  35
softmax.  For agent i, the policy over its feasible action set Ai,t is Eq.(6). This guarantees that
           i
P
   a∈Ai,t θ (a | oi,t ) = 1, placing the policy on the boundary of the matroid polytope P(It ) where
         π
idle probability is zero. This guarantees that the induced marginals x(θ) reside within the matroid
polytope P(It ), satisfying the feasibility condition in Lemma E.1 and enabling valid PME gradient
estimation.

Local Context for Unbiased Gradient Estimation. Proposition E.2 shows that computing the
unbiased gradient estimate requires each agent to evaluate its marginal contribution Ft (At )−Ft (A−i
                                                                                                   t ).
We provide this context through two mechanisms. GNN encoder performs K rounds of message
passing over a dynamic communication graph Et , giving each agent a K-hop receptive field that
captures relevant neighborhood information. MLP encoder directly concatenates features of the k
nearest neighboring agents and tasks into a fixed-dimensional observation vector. Both mechanisms
supply the necessary context for decentralized credit assignment while respecting communication
constraints.

G.2   Network Architecture

We implement the policy πθ and value function Vϕ using an actor-critic framework with separate but
structurally identical 2-layer encoders, as exemplified by the SubMAPG-G architecture in Figure 3.

                Global State       Layer 1 Layer 2

                                                                                MLP
                                                                                           Value



                                   GINE Encoder
                                                                      Global
                                                                      Sum Pooling     Critic Network

                                  Layer 1 Layer 2                                     Actor Network
              Local Observation

                                                                                          Action
                                                                Agent i
                                                                Feature       MLP
                                  GINE Encoder        Agent         Visible    Task         Invisible


Figure 3: The Actor-Critic architecture of SubMAPG-G. The Critic network aggregates information
from the global state graph via sum pooling to estimate the value Vt , while the Actor network
extracts ego-centric features from the local observation to generate the action ai,t .

Reward. Across all experiments, SubMAPG constructs agent-wise rewards            from the task-specific
submodular utility Ft using the difference reward ri,t = Ft (i, ai,t ) | A−i t    = Ft (At ) − Ft (A−i
                                                                                                    t ),
which corresponds to the selected-action marginal contribution used in the stagewise policy-gradient
estimator of Lemma 4.1. Its coordinate-wise counterpart is the unbiased PME marginal-gradient
estimator in Proposition E.2. For information coverage, the stagewise utility is the covered information
value                                                X
                                    Ftcov (At ) =             ρ(v),                                (G.1)
                                                     v∈∪i∈Nt Di,t
where Di,t denotes the set of cells covered by agent i at round t and ρ(v) is the information density.
For an agent-action pair e = (i, a), let pi,t denote the predicted next position of agent i after executing
action a from state st . Define the per-pair tracking score
                                                     rsen − ∥pai,t − qj,t ∥
                                                                           
                             wj,t (i, a) ≜ max 0,                             .
                                                               rsen
The tracking utility is
                                               1       X
                           Fttrk (At ) =                      max wj,t (i, a),                        (G.2)
                                          |Nt ||Mt |        (i,a)∈At
                                                      j∈Mt


                                                     36
with the convention max∅ = 0. Here Mt is the active target set and qj,t denote the positions of
target j.

Actor and Critic Networks. The actor processes the encoded representation hi,t to produce action
logits, followed by the masked softmax (6) over the feasible action set Ai,t , yielding a categorical
distribution that strictly enforces the partition matroid constraint. The critic estimates a centralized
state value Vt from aggregated agent embeddings via sum pooling.

SubMAPG-G. The actor network for each agent i operates on a local observation graph Gi,t that
includes the ego agent, neighboring agents within communication radius rcom , and targets within
sensing radius rsen . Edges are bidirectional among agents and directed from observable targets to
the ego agent. The critic network uses a fully connected global graph Gt containing all active agents
and targets to ensure global state awareness. Both networks employ a 2-layer Graph Isomorphism
Network with Edge features (GINE) [Hu et al., 2020] as the encoder.

SubMAPG-M. For the actor, the input is a fixed-dimensional vector formed by concatenating
relative features of the k nearest agents (within rcom ) and k nearest targets (within rsen ). Missing
entries are zero-padded to maintain consistent dimensionality. For the critic, the input is a global
state vector containing absolute positions of all agents and targets. The encoder processes these
inputs into latent representations for the subsequent actor and critic heads, which are structurally
identical to those in the GNN variant. This design provides an alternative for environments with
stable dimensions.
Remark G.1 (Neural network policies). Proposition E.1 establishes that tabular softmax policies
preserve feasibility on Ft and induce PME marginal-ascent directions in the induced marginal
space. For neural network policies (as used in SubMAPG-G and SubMAPG-M), the mapping
θ → x(θ) is a composition of the network with softmax, and the Jacobian J is no longer a simple
projection operator. The induced marginal update may not align with the projected gradient direction,
introducing a parameterization-dependent bias. Quantifying this bias requires assumptions on the
conditioning of J that are architecture-specific and beyond the scope of this work. We therefore
state our theoretical guarantees (Theorems 5.1 and 5.2) for the Euclidean projected stochastic-
gradient dynamics in x-space. The parameterized SubMAPG serves as the practical implementation,
which empirically achieves performance consistent with, and often exceeding, the conservative 1/2
benchmark suggested by the marginal-space analysis.


H     Simulation Details and Additional Experiments

This appendix provides implementation details and additional experimental results supporting the
main findings in Section 6.

H.1   Multi-Agent Information Coverage and Optimality Analysis

Coverage Environment Setup. The environment consists of a discrete 30 × 30 grid populated
by up to N = 5 agents operating over a training horizonP of T = 100. At each step, agents jointly
maximize the covered information value Ftcov (At ) = v∈∪i∈N Di,t ρ(v), as defined in (G.1), where
                                                                  t
Di,t is the set of cells covered by agent i and ρ(v) ≥ 0 is the information density at cell v. This is a
weighted coverage function with nonnegative weights, and is therefore normalized, monotone,   P and
submodular in the selected agent-action set. Its marginal gains are uniformly bounded by v ρ(v),
so Assumption B.1 holds for the coverage experiments. Following the setup [Prajapat et al., 2024],
the density field ρ is generated from one of three distributions: Uniform, Bimodal Gaussian, or a
Gaussian Process (GP). Each agent possesses a coverage radius rcov = 1 and a communication range
rcom = 2. Agents select actions from {stay, right, up, left, down} and start from a random 5 × 5
clustered region. All learning-based methods are trained in closed environments where all agents
remain active throughout each 100-step episode. Evaluation is conducted in both closed and open
environments over a horizon of 2000 steps; in the open setting, two agents remain active for the full
episode, while the other three agents randomly enter during the first half of the episode and leave
after surviving for at least 20 steps.


                                                  37
Comparison with Multi-Agent Submodular RL. In the absence of existing submodular RL
methods directly designed for multi-agent submodular coverage, we construct a baseline by extending
the single-agent SubPO [Prajapat et al., 2024] to the multi-agent setting, termed MASubPO. The
multi-agent extension inherits the temporal marginal gain of SubPO, rt = Ftcov (At ) − Ft−1
                                                                                         cov
                                                                                             (At−1 ),
and treats rt as a global team reward shared by all agents. In contrast, SubMAPG-M uses an agent-
wise marginal contribution reward, ri,t = Ftcov (At )−Ftcov (A−i           −i
                                                              t ), where At denotes the joint action
set with agent i removed. As shown in Figure 4, SubMAPG-M converges faster than MASubPO
across all density fields. Moreover, Figure 5 and Figure 6 show that SubMAPG-M consistently
outperforms MASubPO in both closed and open evaluations. These results indicate that agent-wise
credit attribution provides a more effective learning signal for multi-agent coordination than the
temporal team-level progress metric used by MASubPO.

                   1.0                                                        1.0                                                          1.0




  Coverage Ratio                                             Coverage Ratio                                               Coverage Ratio
                   0.8                                                        0.8                                                          0.8

                   0.6                                                        0.6                                                          0.6

                   0.4                                                        0.4                                                          0.4
                                           SubMAPG-M                                                    SubMAPG-M                                                    SubMAPG-M
                   0.2                     MASubPO                            0.2                       MASubPO                            0.2                       MASubPO
                                           Tabular                                                      Tabular                                                      Tabular
                   0.0                                                        0.0                                                          0.0
                      0   20    40    60      80       100                       0     20    40    60      80       100                       0      20   40    60      80       100
                          Training Progress (%)                                        Training Progress (%)                                        Training Progress (%)
                           (a) Uniform                                               (b) Gaussian Process                                         (c) Bimodal Gaussian
Figure 4: Training performance in the closed information coverage environment under three density
fields. SubMAPG-M converges faster than MASubPO across all fields; Tabular is included as a
tabular softmax baseline for Proposition E.1. Results are averaged over 5 seeds; shaded regions
indicate standard deviation.


Optimality Gap and Theoretical Bound. We evaluate the learned policy against greedy methods
with known approximation behavior. Since the dynamic coverage problem does not admit a tractable
exact optimal oracle, we use OSG [Xu et al., 2023], an online submodular greedy method with a 1/2-
type guarantee, as the regret reference. We also report CSG-g, a centralized sequential greedy method
with global information [Nemhauser et al., 1978, Qu et al., 2019], as a strong global-information
benchmark. As shown in Figure 5(a)-(c), SubMAPG-M achieves stable coverage above OSG in
the closed environment and approaches CSG-g under the Gaussian Process field. The remaining
gap to CSG-g under the other density fields is expected, as CSG-g uses global information whereas
SubMAPG-M relies only on local communication and observations. In the open environment,
Figure 6(a)-(c) shows that SubMAPG-M remains robust under agent arrivals and departures. With
a time-varying active-agent set, the one-step greedy decisions of CSG-g become less stable, and
OSG even outperforms CSG-g in the Gaussian Process field. In Figure 6(d)-(f), SubMAPG-M
maintains a lower average utility gap with respect to OSG or converges toward zero. This metric is
an empirical online-coordination benchmark rather than a direct measurement of the dynamic regret
in Definition 5.2, whose comparator depends on the exact OPTt (st ) and the optimal continuous
path length PT . Computing these quantities would require solving the PME or discrete submodular
maximization problem at every realized open-system state, which is intractable at the reported
scale. The open-coverage protocol nevertheless matches the slowly varying regime considered by
Corollary 5.1: agents enter only during the first half of the episode and remain active for at least 20
steps before departure, so the active set changes gradually rather than adversarially at every round.

Tabular Softmax Equivalence. We include a Tabular baseline to isolate the PME-based tabular
softmax update in Proposition E.1, without neural function approximation. The baseline uses
independent tabular softmax policies [Mei et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2022] with the same agent-wise
difference reward as SubMAPG-M. In Figure 4, training curves are plotted against normalized training
progress for visual comparison, since Tabular is trained with a larger episode budget than the neural
policies. Although Tabular eventually learns reasonable policies, it typically requires around 20,000
episodes to fully converge, whereas SubMAPG-M and MASubPO converge within 5,000 episodes.
This difference highlights the practical benefit of replacing tabular parameters with a neural encoder
while keeping the same difference-reward update. Since Tabular samples actions stochastically during
training but selects the largest-probability action at evaluation time, its evaluation performance is


                                                                                             38
                          1.0                                                             1.0                                                              1.0




  Coverage Ratio                                                  Coverage Ratio                                                   Coverage Ratio
                          0.8                                                             0.8                                                              0.8

                          0.6                                                             0.6                                                              0.6
                                                   CSG                                                              CSG                                                            CSG
                          0.4                      SubMAPG-M                              0.4                       SubMAPG-M                              0.4                     SubMAPG-M
                                                   Tabular                                                          Tabular                                                        Tabular
                          0.2                      MASubPO                                0.2                       MASubPO                                0.2                     MASubPO
                                                   OSG                                                              OSG                                                            OSG
                          0.0                                                             0.0                                                              0.0
                                 0   500   1000    1500    2000                                  0   500    1000    1500    2000                                 0   500   1000    1500   2000
                                           Steps                                                           Steps                                                           Steps
                                     (a) Uniform                                                 (b) Gaussian Process                                            (c) Bimodal Gaussian
                                                                                          0.3




  Average Regret vs OSG                                           Average Regret vs OSG                                            Average Regret vs OSG
                                                                                                                                                           0.2                     SubMAPG-M
                          0.2                                                                                                                                                      Tabular
                                                   SubMAPG-M                              0.2                       SubMAPG-M
                                                   Tabular                                                          Tabular                                                        MASubPO
                          0.1                      MASubPO                                                          MASubPO                                0.1
                                                                                          0.1

                          0.0
                                                                                          0.0                                                              0.0

                          -0.1
                                                                                          -0.1
                                 0   500   1000     1500   2000                                  0   500    1000     1500   2000                                 0   500   1000    1500   2000
                                           Steps                                                            Steps                                                          Steps
                                     (d) Uniform                                                 (e) Gaussian Process                                            (f) Bimodal Gaussian
Figure 5: Coverage performance and regret in the closed information coverage environment. Columns
correspond to Uniform, Gaussian
                            P Process, and P  Bimodal Gaussian density fields. Top row: normalized
covered information value v∈∪i Di,t ρ(v)/ v ρ(v). Bottom row: average utility gap to OSG
1
   Pt                      
 t   τ =1 Fτ
            OSG
                − Fτmethod . Curves report the mean over 20 independent evaluation rollouts; shaded
regions indicate standard deviation.




                          1.0                                                             1.0                                                              1.0




  Coverage Ratio                                                  Coverage Ratio                                                   Coverage Ratio
                          0.8                                                             0.8                                                              0.8

                          0.6                                                             0.6                                                              0.6
                                                   CSG                                                              CSG                                                            CSG
                          0.4                      SubMAPG-M                              0.4                       SubMAPG-M                              0.4                     SubMAPG-M
                                                   Tabular                                                          Tabular                                                        Tabular
                          0.2                      MASubPO                                0.2                       MASubPO                                0.2                     MASubPO
                                                   OSG                                                              OSG                                                            OSG
                          0.0                                                             0.0                                                              0.0
                                 0   500   1000    1500    2000                                  0   500    1000    1500    2000                                 0   500   1000    1500   2000
                                           Steps                                                           Steps                                                           Steps
                                     (a) Uniform                                                 (b) Gaussian Process                                            (c) Bimodal Gaussian
                                                                                          0.4                                                              0.5




  Average Regret vs OSG                                           Average Regret vs OSG                                            Average Regret vs OSG
                                                                                                                    SubMAPG-M
                                                   SubMAPG-M                                                                                               0.4                     SubMAPG-M
                                                                                          0.3                       Tabular
                          0.4                      Tabular                                                                                                                         Tabular
                                                                                                                    MASubPO                                0.3
                                                   MASubPO                                                                                                                         MASubPO
                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                           0.2
                          0.2
                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                           0.1

                          0.0                                                             0.0                                                              0.0
                                 0   500   1000    1500    2000                                  0   500    1000    1500    2000                                 0   500   1000    1500   2000
                                           Steps                                                           Steps                                                           Steps
                                     (d) Uniform                                                 (e) Gaussian Process                                            (f) Bimodal Gaussian
Figure 6: Coverage performance and regret in the open information coverage environment with
agent arrivals and departures. Columns correspond to Uniform, Gaussian    P Process, and  PBimodal
Gaussian density fields. Top row: normalized covered information value v∈∪i Di,t ρ(v)         v ρ(v).
                                         1
                                           Pt       OSG       method
                                                                     
Bottom row: average utility gap to OSG t τ =1 Fτ         − Fτ          . Curves report the mean over
20 independent evaluation rollouts; shaded regions indicate standard deviation.




                                                                                                           39
better than what the training curve alone suggests. However, as shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6,
Tabular remains weaker than SubMAPG-M due to its limited state representation. These results
support Proposition E.1 by showing that, in the tabular softmax setting, the agent-wise difference
reward induces a PME-compatible feasible ascent update, while neural function approximation
improves sample efficiency and generalization in practice.

H.2    Multi-Agent Target Tracking and Performance Analysis

Tracking Environment Setup. Agents and targets move across a 100 × 100m2 continuous 2D
domain. Each agent follows unicycle kinematics with constant speed va = 1.0 m/s:
                                       pxi,t+1 = pxi,t + va ∆t cos ψi,t ,
                                       pyi,t+1 = pyi,t + va ∆t sin ψi,t ,                                (H.1)
                                       θi,t+1 = ψi,t + ωi,t ∆t,
where pi,t = (pxi,t , pyi,t ) is the position of agent i, ψi,t is its heading, ∆t = 1 is the time-step interval,
and ωi,t ∈ [−π/6, π/6]rad/s is selected from 12 uniformly spaced steering actions. Agents sense
targets within rsen = 10m and communicate with other agents within rcom = 25m. Targets move at
speed vm = 0.25 m/s with three motion patterns: Static targets remain stationary at initial positions,
Linear targets move in a fixed initial direction with constant velocity, Random targets change direction
randomly with 5% probability each step while maintaining constant speed.
We use the tracking utility Fttrk (At ) defined in (G.2), which rewards each active target according to
the closest selected agent-action pair within the sensing radius. For any fixed round t with fixed active
sets Nt and Mt , the normalization factor in Fttrk is constant with respect to the selected joint action.
Each target-wise term has the form maxe∈At wj,t (e) for a nonnegative score function wj,t (e) ∈ [0, 1].
Such maximum-of-score set functions are normalized, monotone, and submodular; nonnegative sums
and positive rescaling preserve these properties. Since each sensing score is clipped to [0, 1], the
marginal gains are uniformly bounded. Therefore, Fttrk satisfies Assumption B.1 in the tracking
experiments.
We train all agents in closed environments with a fixed number of 12 agents and 12 targets per
episode, each episode lasting 200 steps. During training, all targets follow linear motion patterns
to facilitate policy learning. We set the actor learning rate to 3 × 10−4 , the critic learning rate to
5 × 10−4 , the PPO epoch to 8, the hidden size to 128, the entropy coefficient to 0.012, and enable
advantage normalization.

Open Environment Experiments. Models are evaluated in open environments where agents and
targets dynamically arrive and depart. The initial set of agents and targets persists for the entire
episode, while additional entities spawn at random steps uniformly sampled from [1, 0.75T ] with
T = 2500 steps. Each new entity has a random lifespan with a minimum of 400 steps. The
environment supports up to 12 agents and 12 targets. Among the 12 targets, the motion pattern
distribution is set to Static:Linear:Random = 1:3:8. We evaluate three initial population sizes: 4
agents/4 targets, 8 agents/8 targets, and 10 agents/10 targets. These configurations test robustness
across different initial densities before the system reaches its maximum open-system capacity. As
shown in Figure 7, SubMAPG-G consistently achieves strong cumulative utility across all three
settings and maintains agent-target distances comparable to centralized greedy methods while clearly
outperforming OSG, indicating robust performance under varying initial population sizes. As in the
coverage experiments, these results should be interpreted as empirical evidence of robustness under
open-system dynamics rather than a direct numerical verification of Corollary 5.1. The theoretical
condition depends on the path length PT of the optimal continuous PME solutions, which is not
tractable to compute in the tracking environment. The evaluation protocol is designed to be consistent
with the slowly varying regime: initial agents and targets persist for the full episode, additional
entities arrive before 0.75T , and each new entity has a minimum lifespan of 400 steps.

Reward Mechanism: Difference Reward Versus Global Reward. We conduct an ablation study
to validate the effectiveness of the submodular difference reward. The study compares SubMAPG-M,
trained with the difference reward ri,t = Fttrk (At ) − Fttrk (A−i t ), against G-MLP, trained with
                                      trk
the shared global reward rt = Ft (At ). Both models share an identical network architecture.


                                                      40
                               125           CSG-g                                                                             CSG-g                                                               CSG-g
                                                                                                                                                                                      100




 Cumulative Utility                                                                 Cumulative Utility                                                  Cumulative Utility
                                             CSG-l                                                                100          CSG-l                                                               CSG-l
                               100           G-MLP                                                                             G-MLP                                                               G-MLP
                                                                                                                                                                                       75
                                             SubMAPG-G                                                             75          SubMAPG-G                                                           SubMAPG-G
                                75
                                             OSG                                                                               OSG                                                                 OSG
                                                                                                                   50                                                                  50
                                50           SubMAPG-M                                                                         SubMAPG-M                                                           SubMAPG-M

                                25                                                                                 25                                                                  25

                                 0                                                                                  0                                                                   0
                                      0         1000       2000                                                         0          1000          2000                                       0         1000       2000
                                                   Steps                                                                                Steps                                                            Steps
                                          (a) N0 = M0 = 4                                                                   (b) N0 = M0 = 8                                                     (c) N0 = M0 = 10
                               10.0




 Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent                                                        Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent                                         Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent
                                                                                                                                                                                      8.0
                                                                                                                  8.0
                                8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      6.0
                                                                                                                  6.0
                                6.0

                                                                                                                  4.0                                                                 4.0
                                4.0

                                2.0                                                                               2.0                                                                 2.0
                                      0          1000      2000                                                         0          1000          2000                                       0         1000       2000
                                                   Steps                                                                             Steps                                                              Steps
                                          (d) N0 = M0 = 4                                                                   (e) N0 = M0 = 8                                                     (f) N0 = M0 = 10
Figure 7: Tracking performance in open environments under different initial population sizes.
Columns correspond to N0 = M0 = 4, N0 = M0 = 8, and N0 = M0 = 10, where N0 and M0
denote
Pt     the initial numbers of active agents and targets respectively. Top row: cumulative utility
       F
  τ =1 τ . Bottom row: average distance from each target to its nearest agent. Curves report the
mean over 5 seeds; shaded regions indicate one standard deviation.


As illustrated in Figure 8, SubMAPG-M converges faster and achieves higher cumulative utility,
confirming that difference rewards provide more informative gradients for decentralized coordination.
This advantage is consistently corroborated by results in the coverage task (see Figure 4). Note that
we do not report a corresponding ablation for the GNN-based SubMAPG-G, as its architecture failed
to converge when trained solely with a global reward.




                                                           Cumulative Utility
                                                                                6


                                                                                4


                                                                                2                                                               SubMAPG-M
                                                                                                                                                G-MLP
                                                                                0
                                                                                                                            2000             4000       6000
                                                                                                                               Episode
Figure 8: Reward ablation in the tracking task. SubMAPG-M uses the agent-wise difference reward
ri,t = Fttrk (At ) − Fttrk (A−i                                                           trk
                             t ), while G-MLP uses the shared global utility reward rt = Ft (At )
with the same MLP encoder.


Scalability. We evaluate zero-shot scalability by deploying policies trained with up to 12 agents and
targets to systems with up to 48 agents and targets. To keep the spatial density and sensing difficulty
approximately constant, we scale the map side length and sensing radius rsen together. Without this
scaling, larger maps would make targets substantially harder to observe regardless of the policy. As
shown in Figure 9, both SubMAPG-G variants retain 50-65% of CSG-l’s cumulative utility despite
the domain shift. Recall that CSG-l uses centralized coordination, whose advantage grows with the


                                                                                                                                   41
                                              100                     CSG-l




                         Cumulative Utility
                                                                      OSG
                                              80                      SubMAPG-G(scaled)
                                                                      SubMAPG-G(fixed)
                                              60

                                              40

                                              20
                                                    12         24          36         48
                                                         Number of Agents/Targets
Figure 9: Zero-shot scalability from 12 to 48 agents and targets using a policy trained on systems
with up to 12 agents and targets. The map side length and sensing radius are scaled to keep the
spatial density and sensing difficulty approximately constant. SubMAPG-G(scaled) also scales the
communication radius rcom , while SubMAPG-G(fixed) keeps rcom = 25 m.


number of agents and targets. Notably, SubMAPG-G(fixed) with rcom = 25 m performs comparably
to the scaled communication variant, suggesting that the learned policy generalizes to larger systems
without increasing communication range.

Robustness Analysis. In the following analysis, we consider a closed environment with 12 agents
and 12 targets, and perform ablations on individual parameters of the environment to isolate their
specific effects.
Robustness to Target Motion Patterns. We assess robustness against diverse target behaviors using
Static:Linear:Random ratios of 10:1:1, 5:4:3, and 1:3:8. As shown in Figure 10, SubMAPG-G
rivals or exceeds the centralized CSG-g, and SubMAPG-M remains competitive with CSG-l. Al-
though the performance gap narrows as stochasticity increases in Figure 10c, both variants maintain
strong tracking capabilities. Furthermore, SubMAPG-M’s consistent superiority over G-MLP in all
configurations validates the efficacy of our difference reward formulation.
Robustness to Communication Range. We vary rcom ∈ {5, 15, 35} m while fixing rsen = 10 m. As
shown in Figure 11, performance improves with larger communication range but exhibits diminishing
gains beyond 15 m. At a restricted range of rcom = 5 m, limited observation acquisition hampers all
learning-based methods. In Figure 11b and 11e, SubMAPG-G recovers near-greedy performance,
whereas SubMAPG-M shows continued performance gains as rcom increases from 15 m to 35 m.
These results indicate that the GNN-based variant is more resilient to limited communication.




                                                                 42
                                                            100
                                                                        CSG-g                                                             100             CSG-g                                                 100                      CSG-g




                              Cumulative Utility                                                           Cumulative Utility                                                  Cumulative Utility
                                                             80         CSG-l                                                                             CSG-l                                                                          CSG-l
                                                                                                                                           80                                                                             80
                                                                        G-MLP                                                                             G-MLP                                                                          G-MLP
                                                             60         SubMAPG-G                                                          60             SubMAPG-G                                                                      SubMAPG-G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                        OSG                                                                               OSG                                                                            OSG
                                                             40         SubMAPG-M                                                          40             SubMAPG-M                                                       40             SubMAPG-M

                                                             20                                                                            20                                                                             20

                                                              0                                                                             0                                                                              0
                                                                  0        1000           2000                                                      0         1000      2000                                                    0           1000           2000
                                                                                 Steps                                                                          Steps                                                                          Steps
                                                                        (a) 10:1:1                                                                         (b) 5:4:3                                                                      (c) 1:3:8
                                                                                                                                                                                                              8.0




                              Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent                                                   Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent                                        Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent
                                                            8.0                                                                           8.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                              6.0
                                                            6.0                                                                           6.0

                                                            4.0                                                                           4.0                                                                 4.0


                                                            2.0                                                                           2.0                                                                 2.0

                                                                  0        1000           2000                                                  0             1000      2000                                                    0           1000           2000
                                                                             Steps                                                                              Steps                                                                         Steps
                                                                        (d) 10:1:1                                                                          (e) 5:4:3                                                                     (f) 1:3:8
   Figure 10: Tracking performance under different target-motion compositions. Columns correspond
                                                                                           Pt
   to Static:Linear:Random ratios of 10:1:1, 5:4:3, and 1:3:8. Top row: cumulative utility τ =1 Fτ .
   Bottom row: average distance from each target to its nearest agent. Curves report the mean over 5
   seeds; shaded regions indicate one standard deviation.




                              100                                                                                                    100                                                                                  100
                                                                      CSG-l                                                                               CSG-l                                                                           CSG-l




Cumulative Utility                                                                               Cumulative Utility                                                                        Cumulative Utility
                                          80                          G-MLP                                                               80              G-MLP                                                            80             G-MLP
                                                                      SubMAPG-G                                                                           SubMAPG-G                                                                       SubMAPG-G
                                          60                          SubMAPG-M                                                           60              SubMAPG-M                                                        60             SubMAPG-M

                                          40                                                                                              40                                                                               40

                                          20                                                                                              20                                                                               20

                                                      0                                                                                    0                                                                                   0
                                                              0          1000            2000                                                   0             1000      2000                                                        0         1000           2000
                                                                            Steps                                                                               Steps                                                                              Steps
                                                                  (a) rcom = 5 m                                                                        (b) rcom = 15 m                                                                 (c) rcom = 35 m
                              10.0




Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent                                                                      Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent                                                                Avg. Dist. to Nearest Agent
                                                                                                                                  6.0                                                                                     6.0
                                       8.0                                                                                        5.0                                                                                     5.0

                                       6.0                                                                                        4.0                                                                                     4.0
                                                                                                                                  3.0                                                                                     3.0
                                       4.0
                                                                                                                                  2.0                                                                                     2.0
                                       2.0
                                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                              0           1000           2000                                                   0             1000      2000                                                        0         1000           2000
                                                                            Steps                                                                               Steps                                                                              Steps
                                                                  (d) rcom = 5 m                                                                        (e) rcom = 15 m                                                                 (f) rcom = 35 m
   Figure 11: Tracking performance under different communication ranges with fixed sensing radius
   rPsen = 10 m. Columns correspond to rcom = 5 m, 15 m, and 35 m. Top row: cumulative utility
       t
       τ =1 Fτ . Bottom row: average distance from each target to its nearest agent. Curves report the
    mean over 5 seeds; shaded regions indicate one standard deviation.




                                                                                                                                                               43
